Add an LLM policy for `rust-lang/rust` (#1040)
rust-lang-nursery/rust-forge: src/policies/llm-usage.md

Reviewer: Since this is only in the PR description, will cite in a detached thread. Note that this isn't a blocking discussion, nor is it an invitation to discuss the topics being mentioned; it's just about the presence of this note itself. I think it's extremely important for the sake of decorum on these focused, internal policies going forward.

> No comment on this PR may mention the following topics:
> 
> * Long-term social or economic impact of LLMs
> * The environmental impact of LLMs
> * Anything to do with the copyright status of LLM output
> * Moral judgements about people who use LLMs
> 
> We have asked the moderation team to help us enforce these rules.

It's *extremely* unprecedented to just entirely ban a list of topics from a focused discussion that almost certainly will not leave internal discussion. While this PR is public, basically nobody follows the `rust-forge` repo except team members, and the quality of discussion will expectedly be much higher. While there is *a* concern about rogue people showing up here to vent, there will not be many, I don't think that it deserves a dedicated callout, and I would hope that team members are expected to behave better than this.

The simple remark that these are intentionally omitted from the discussion for the sake of having *a* policy, I think, is sufficient to not focus on these discussions. And so, I think we should try trust the team more, because otherwise, this creates a very hostile pretence that just implies that one side is strong-arming the other into not discussing their arguments.

Here's an example of something that is *also* just as off-topic as those, but not in this list: the repeated arguments mentioned in favour of "LLMs are so prevalent, you might as well ban Google"; it similarly is a response that completely ignores the contents of the document and its preamble, and would be completely unproductive to policy discussion. My point here is, by *only* explicitly calling out arguments on one side, it implies that only one side has the potential to misbehave, which is absolutely not true. Again, I'd hope team members would be better than this.

These *are* relevant arguments for policy, just, this policy is focused and has decided to move forward with something *until* consensus can be reached later. It has explicitly stated that it wishes to discuss other things first, and I think that's incredibly valid. I just don't think that starting a discussion with "the banhammer is on standby" is very productive; it just further increases distrust between two sides that have been having enough trouble coming to consensus as-is.

Reviewer 2: None of those topics are relevant for allowing more things in the policy. Only as arguments for forbidding some of the things allowed by the policy. The policy is about the direct effects on maintainers here in rust-lang/rust. The wider effects are explicitly not part of this policy and thus the topics are delegated to the private zulip stream that all team members have access to.

Reviewer: I mean, yes, that's true, but:

1. The comment simply says that they're banned from discussion in this topic, and does not encourage them to be discussed elsewhere (even though people reading it who are project members know they can be).
2. This doesn't address any of the points I've made at all.

Reviewer: Threaded to push the discussion into threads.

I concede that getting out a policy soon is an incredible gain and find it outright disrespectful for people to stonewall the discussion on pedantic grounds. More examples show up every day of where we really need *a* policy to decide what to do at least on `rust-lang/rust` and the longer we spend bickering, the more frustrating things get.

On that note, I am tired of people pretending that the omission of ethics from the discussion is anything but a massive concession here to please people who are so childish they refuse to discuss the absolute atrocities committed by the people who make the tools they love.

Sorry, but grow up.

If you think that the benefits of these tools is justified, own it. Let us know you've used them so we can review them accurately. If you don't want to admit that you used them because you're worried people might judge you for making a potentially negative ethical decision, then are you conceding that the discussion *should* include ethics? Because you can't simultaneously request that ethics not be used to block your use of these tools, while requesting that people not judge you for using them because of ethics. Either ethics is on the table and we fully account for that, or ethics are not on the table and you have to deal with the consequences of that. You can't have both.

As I've alluded to in other policy discussions, there are only two valid solutions to people being judged for LLM usage:

1. Don't use LLMs, so they don't get judged
2. Use LLMs, and assert that the judgements are invalid

Don't just hide and pretend that people aren't allowed to have opinions of you. Because while we certainly can ask people to avoid discussing it in threads, we absolutely cannot prevent people from having opinions. There are no thought crimes in the rust-lang org. People can and will have feelings about what you do and it's even in our fucking COC:

> Respect that people have differences of opinion and that every design or implementation choice carries a trade-off and numerous costs. There is seldom a right answer.

You can't hide from opinions. So stop trying to influence policy because you're worried about others' opinions of you; own those opinions, and either call them out as wrong or accept them as right *and change your actions*.

I'm tired of people dancing around the issue of disclosure with vague concepts like "but people might dislike me uwu," grow the fuck up. We ask you to use these tools because they have unprecedented effects on software development and it is so much easier to just ask everyone to state whether they're used than come up with some vague guidelines for why it's okay to not mention it that people will have no idea how to follow. If you're worried about the judgements from people finding out that you're using it, that's a you problem. This isn't some vague "overstepping;" just like how it's not overstepping to ask people what version of Rust they're using when filing bugs, it's not overstepping to ask people to just tell us when they're using an LLM in an explicitly numerated list of cases.

As always, various shortcomings of the policy can and should be improved. For example, clarifying where submodules stand relative to this policy is important and good. Nitpicking about when you have to disclose stuff is not good. Because I'm assuming that everyone discussing here is competent, I'm assuming that you're not stupid and know *exactly* what you're arguing when you ask to not disclose LLM usage. I'm asking you to either own what you're doing or give it up rather than weaken the effectiveness of the policy.

Similarly, for the folks saying that the omission of ethics is bad for this policy, I ask you to kindly leave that out from this discussion and take it into my RFC instead.

Thanks.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8a1ce25d78f9d20a85201bf8808f1c8081be41cf)*

Reviewer 3: I understand you're frustrated, but I don't think this kind of language helps anyone.

About your point: you explicitly state that people are allowed to have their own opinion, but apparently they are not allowed, per you, to have an opinion on whether the discussion of ethics is relevant here.

And for the record, I don't use LLMs and I dislike them for many reasons. But I also think that setting a policy on the basis of the ethical consequences of them is not what we should do.

Reviewer 4: The missing link to said RFC: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3959

Reviewer: I'm not the one who decided to omit ethics from the discussion here; I'm respecting the opinions of the author on that, and conceding that it's fair to get a simpler policy out sooner in this particular case. There are allowed to be concurrent policy decisions and this policy's opinion is that focusing entirely on pragmatic labelling of LLM contributions, alongside calling out certain problematic usages, is the best way to get a policy out sooner.

Is that the best choice? No idea! But I respect the author and their wishes and have an explicit alternative that will almost certainly take longer to figure out. So, instead of bothering jyn about it, I'm inviting the discussion to happen there instead.

Reviewer 5: For some reason, ever since f716356205795cbca88af27f6bf4cc5908b6006e the line endings of the entire file are all changed to be CRLF. *(The large red and green sections in the diff for that commit made me investigate what's going on…)*

AFAICT - besides [2 random lines in `src/triagebot/zulip-commands.md`](https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Arust-lang%2Frust-forge%20%2F%5Cr%5Cn%2F&type=code) - this would be the first use of that line ending style in this repo

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..1b49326aa136c1b29946ed5aafc4b6963e190253)*

#### Legend

- ✅ Allowed
- ❌ Banned
- ⚠️ Allowed with caveats. Must disclose that an LLM was used.
- ℹ️ Adds additional detail to the policy. These bullets are normative.

### Rules

#### ✅ Allowed
- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
    - ℹ️ This does not include reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into the Rust project.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover bugs in unmerged code.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.

>     - ℹ️ This applies even outside GitHub, such as in emails to help@crates.io or Zulip comments.

Reviewer 6: if this policy is for r-l/r then everything "outside GitHub" seems out of scope for this policy, no? 😅 

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..1c6c4eddaa531ff40401bcc92d0e5dd554c5c9ac)*

Author: removed that. meant to add it as a follow-up commit, sorry ... will do that for the next one.

### Rules

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover bugs in unmerged code.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.
- Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.

>     - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as paragraph+ doc-comments or multiple inline paragraphs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as paragraphs, doc-comments, or multiple inline paragraphs.
```

I don't know what "multiple inline paragraphs" are :D

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..772edebca89bb597b33fafacbf6779944831718c)*

>     - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as paragraph+ doc-comments or multiple inline paragraphs.

Reviewer 7: Suggestion: (maybe also)

- ℹ️ This includes non-trivial changes to the rustc book / unstable book

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..772edebca89bb597b33fafacbf6779944831718c)*

Author: I think that's already implied by "Documentation". We can't be exhaustive here and I think it hurts us to try.

    We understand that while asking an LLM research questions it may, unprompted, suggest small changes where there really isn't another way to write it.
    However, you must still type out the changes yourself; you cannot give the LLM write access to your source code.
    - We do not accept PRs made up solely of trivial changes.
      See [the compiler team's typo fix policy](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/contributing.html#writing-documentation:~:text=Please%20notice%20that%20we%20don%E2%80%99t%20accept%20typography%2Fspellcheck%20fixes%20to%20internal%20documentation).
  - See also "learning from an LLM's solution" in ⚠️ below.

#### ⚠️ Allowed with caveats
The following are decided on a case-by-case basis.
Please avoid them where possible.
In general, existing contributors will be treated more leniently here than new contributors.
We may ask you for the original prompts or design documents that went into the LLM's output;
please have them on-hand, and be available yourself to answer questions about your process.

> - Using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style.

Reviewer 7: Suggestion: I suggest adding an explicit ❌ case here to cover "proxying LLM output to answer reviewer questions" since I've seen this quite a few times.

* ❌ Proxying reviewer questions to LLMs then pasting the response back
* ⚠️ Conditionally allowed, disclosure required: using LLMs to research (etc.) and learn from its solution, but must understand its correctness / tradeoffs, but answer in your own words and your evaluations.

(specific wording I'm not married to, just the general idea)

Author: I have a "comments from a personal user account originally authored by an LLM" ban. Is that sufficient or do you want something more specific?

Reviewer 7: Ah. That seems okay. It might be worth giving this as an example, i.e. "serving as a proxy between LLM and the reviewer", but not fussed about including this or not 👍 Feel free to resolve this comment chain

    - ℹ️ If a linter already exists for the language you're writing, we strongly suggest using that linter instead of or in addition to the LLM.
    - ℹ️ Please keep in mind that it's easy for LLM reviews to have false positives or focus on trivialities. We suggest configuring it to the "least chatty" setting you can.
    - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed. It's ok to require a *response* to each comment but the response can be "the bot's wrong here".
        - In other words, reviewers must explicitly endorse an LLM comment before blocking a PR. They are responsible for their own analysis of the LLM's comment and cannot treat it as a CI failure.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to private use of an LLM for reviews; see ✅ above.

All of these **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

## Appendix

### No witch hunts
["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).
Do not try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.
If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.

> Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM is an instant code of conduct violation.

Reviewer 7: Nit: maybe link to CoC (https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/)?

If you are not sure where you fall in this policy, please talk to us.
Don't try to hide it.

### Responsibility

All contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.

> - ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally authored by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

Reviewer 7: Suggestion:

(hm, maybe in the banned usage section, but)

- ❌ LLM tools or review bots may not make the final determination of approval/acceptance instead of a reviewer.

(Don't know how we'd want to word it, but the idea aligns with the usual "human in the loop", "LLM tools cannot be responsible" etc.)

Author: hm, I had that originally but removed it since it seemed "implied" and no one objected to it. I'll add it back explicitly.

### "originally authored"

This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".
No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

> ### Non-exhaustive policy

Reviewer 7: Suggestion: we can also mention that this policy can be tuned / evolved to include more examples / adjust categories as we learn from more experience

> ## Policy

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
## Interim LLM Usage Policy
```

Adding a title that mentions LLM usage, and flagging this as interim to foreshadow the section at the end noting that policies may evolve.

I am hopeful that this is capturing a sentiment shared both by people who want the policy to be stricter and bypeople who want the policy to be less strict.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I stand by this policy. I would be happy for this to be a semi-permanent policy. We can of course edit it, but I consider "interim" to be a forward-looking statement and I don't want to make those in this policy.

For additional information about the policy itself, see [the appendix](#appendix).

### Overview

Using an LLM while working on `rust-lang/rust` is conditionally allowed.
However, we find it important to keep the following points in mind:

- Many people find LLM-generated code and writing deeply unpleasant to read or review.
- Many people find LLMs to be a significant aid to learning and discovery.

Therefore, the guidelines are roughly as follows:

> > It's fine to use LLMs to answer questions, analyze, distill, refine, check, suggest, review. But not to **create**.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
> It's fine to use LLMs to answer questions, analyze, distill, refine, check, suggest, review. Do not use them to **create**.
```

Wording nit; I think that this is a bit clearer and more direct.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: This is a direct quote from @nnethercote. I really like this quote and I would like to keep it in its original form.

> LLMs work best when used as a tool to write *better*, not *faster*.

> 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
> In `rust-lang/rust`, please do not use LLMs as a tool to write *faster*.
```

Having this as a high-level summary is offering a judgement on LLMs that feels like it isn't necessary for the policy, and makes consensus more difficult to reach. For anti-LLM folks it's saying that they work best when used to write "better", which is a point in dispute. I would also expect (but don't want to put words in people's mouths) that for pro-LLM folks the point that they don't work well when used to work faster may be in dispute.

I've tried to rephrase this in a fashion that, rather than expressing a general statement on when "LLMs work best", is instead expressing what is desired *for `rust-lang/rust` as that's the scope of this policy.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: This is adapted from a quote by @ubiratansoares. This edit changes the quote beyond recognition, and I would rather remove it than edit this much.

Reviewer 8: Then I think it would be best removed, on the basis that previous line covers similar territory and seems less controversial.

Reviewer 10: Tbh I don't actually understand what this quote is supposed to mean; if anything, I would phrase it the other way around (you can use LLMs to do [things you can already do] to get them done faster, but you shouldn't use them to do things you don't already know how to do yourself).

Reviewer 11: Honestly, it was the 
> LLMs work best when used as a tool to write *better*, not *faster*.

that I took back to my team and reworked our approach to AI-generated code.  I think that statement itself has a lot of weight.

#### Legend

- ✅ Allowed
- ❌ Banned

> - ⚠️ Allowed with caveats. Must disclose that an LLM was used.

Reviewer 9: Do you want a bit of guidance about "which model was used"? Capabilities differ meaningfully, and this can be a useful signal for readers.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: Added a sentence under "Allowed with caveats".

- ℹ️ Adds additional detail to the policy. These bullets are normative.

### Rules

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).

>     - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover bugs in unmerged code.

Reviewer 9: "Bugs" can be read narrowly. It might be useful to have a parenthetical like "bugs (or other flaws)".

Some of the most useful things to find as a reviewer are not true bugs: they're "questionable code duplication", "dodgy abstraction" or "easily fixed limitation".

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.
- Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.

>     - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This includes *any* doc comments, or non-trivial source comments.
```

Reordering this to make it clear first and foremost that "Documentation" includes *any* doc comments, moving "non-trivial source comments" second. This also drops the quantitative "multiple paragraphs"; some multi-paragraph comments may be trivial, and some one-sentence comments may not be.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: If you are using an LLM to write a multi-paragraph comment that is trivial, IMO that should also be banned. If you have a load-bearing single-line comment, I think that falls under "code changes authored by an LLM", although I'm not sure how to say that concisely.

>     - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics or similar user-visible output.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: We cannot be exhaustive in this policy and I think it hurts us to try.

- Code changes that are originally authored by an LLM.
  - This does not include "trivial" changes that do not meet the [threshold of originality](https://fsfe.org/news/2025/news-20250515-01.en.html), which fall under ⚠️ below.
    We understand that while asking an LLM research questions it may, unprompted, suggest small changes where there really isn't another way to write it.

>     However, you must still type out the changes yourself; you cannot give the LLM write access to your source code.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    However, you must still type out the changes yourself; you cannot give the LLM write access to your source code. This is not because we are trying to turn you into a typist, but because it is *very easy* to err in the direction of increasingly non-trivial changes if the LLM gets to directly write the code.
```

Trying to address potential reactions of "why are you making me re-type this?!".

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I think if we want a rationale for each rule that should be a separate document, not part of the moderation and contributing guidelines.

>     - We do not accept PRs made up solely of trivial changes.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - We do not in general accept PRs made up *solely* of trivial changes, such as non-user-visible typos.
```

Trying to make sure people get an idea of what "trivial" means here; for instance, typos in user-visible documentation aren't trivial.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

      See [the compiler team's typo fix policy](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/contributing.html#writing-documentation:~:text=Please%20notice%20that%20we%20don%E2%80%99t%20accept%20typography%2Fspellcheck%20fixes%20to%20internal%20documentation).
  - See also "learning from an LLM's solution" in ⚠️ below.

> - Treating an LLM review as a sufficient condition to merge a change.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- Treating an LLM review as a sufficient condition to merge a change, or to reject a change.
```

Rationale: as noted on the next line, LLM reviews must be advisory-only. Someone contributing should not be forced to care about the LLM review, unless a human who *wants* to deal with the LLM output evaluates it and posts a human-written review.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

  LLM reviews, if enabled by a team, **must** be advisory-only.
  Teams can have a policy that code can be merged without review, and they can have a policy that code must be reviewed by at least one person,

>   but they may not have a policy that an LLM counts as a person.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
  but they may not have a policy that an LLM review substitutes for a human review.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

    - ℹ️ See "review bots" in ⚠️ below.
    - ℹ️ An LLM review does not substitute for self-review. Authors are expected to review their own code before posting and after each change.

#### ⚠️ Allowed with caveats
The following are decided on a case-by-case basis.
Please avoid them where possible.

> In general, existing contributors will be treated more leniently here than new contributors.

Reviewer 9: This distinction needs a rationale to avoid feeling unfair.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

We may ask you for the original prompts or design documents that went into the LLM's output;

> please have them on-hand, and be available yourself to answer questions about your process.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
please have them on-hand, and be available to answer questions about your process.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I think this edit makes it unclear whether the author needs to be available or whether it's the LLM or a co-author. I would like to keep the original wording.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
please have them on-hand, and be available to personally answer questions about your process.
```

Ah, I think that's valuable. How about this wording? "available yourself" just reads poorly to me.

- Using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style.

> - Using machine-translation from your native language without posting your original message.

Reviewer 9: I think that this could be cleaned up by moving "without posting your original message" down into the sub-bullet point.

Cut here, then make that point about how posting your original message can be very useful, especially if nuance is important.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Reviewer 9: If this change is adopted, I think that this belongs in the "allowed" category. Other items there have similar "here's some helpful advice, and I worry that "using translations is kinda-borderline" will be perceived as hostile to readers who do not have native-level English skills.

Author: I think this changes the rule into a different policy. I know this is under "allowed with caveats" and that doesn't feel great, but that *is* what we're saying. We don't want to see only the translated message.

  Doing so can introduce new miscommunications that weren't there originally, and prevents someone who speaks the language from providing a better translation.
    - ℹ️ Posting both your original message and the translated version is always ok, but you must still disclose that machine-translation was used.

>     - ℹ️ This policy also applies to non-LLM machine translations such as Google Translate.

Reviewer: I am pretty sure Google Translate uses LLMs right now, so rather than give a specific example, I think this would be better reworded to just say that this applies to all machine translation whether or not you're sure if an LLM is being used.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..815da6eaed40bb1b045cc89d37fa4287e505744f)*

Author: I think going into that much detail will just confuse people.

Reviewer 9: I think that this parenthetical obscures more than it clarifies. I would just cut it, or maybe go with "Using machine translation (including e.g. Google Translate)"

>     - ℹ️ This policy also applies to non-LLM machine translations such as Google Translate.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This policy applies to any machine translations, including Google Translate.
```

(This removes the assumption that no LLMs are involved in Google Translate; it's not clear if that's true today, and it may not be true in the future.)

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

- Using an LLM as a "review bot" for PRs.

>     - ℹ️ Review bots **must** have a separate GitHub account that marks them as an LLM. They **must not** post under a personal account.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ Review bots **must** have a separate GitHub account that marks them as an LLM. You **must not** post (or allow a tool to post) LLM reviews verbatim on your personal account unless clearly quoted with your own personal interpretation of the bot's analysis.
```
Capturing some of the ideas from Zulip discussions on academic norms around quotation.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

>     - ℹ️ Review bots **must** have a separate GitHub account that marks them as an LLM. They **must not** post under a personal account.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ Review bots **must** have a separate GitHub account that marks them as an LLM. They **must not** post under a personal account.
    - ℹ️ Review bot accounts must be blockable by individual users via the standard GitHub user-blocking mechanism. (Some GitHub "app" accounts post comments that look like users but cannot be blocked
```

This one might be a controversial suggestion, but I think it's important. Claude and openhands-agent, for instance, are (currently) well-behaved here, and use an account that can be blocked. Copilot and Codex (OpenAI/ChatGPT) and some others are not. People should have the ability to opt out of interactions with such bots just as they can with users.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

    - ℹ️ Review bots that post without being approved by a maintainer will be banned.

>     - ℹ️ If a linter already exists for the language you're writing, we strongly suggest using that linter instead of or in addition to the LLM.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ LLM reviews should not be used for deterministic checks, such as formatting or linting. If such tools exist for your code base, we strongly suggest using and improving them.
```
"Deterministic checks" is a bit fuzzy, but that's the core idea. 

You should not use the expensive, unreliable, (morally suspect,) tool when you *can* do this better, regardless of your feelings on using LLMs in general.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I see what you're going for but I don't think I like this wording. The core idea is whether there is a more *reliable* tool available. Let me see if I can write something up.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, reliability is the key idea! Much better.

>     - ℹ️ Please keep in mind that it's easy for LLM reviews to have false positives or focus on trivialities. We suggest configuring it to the "least chatty" setting you can.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ Configure LLM review tools to reduce false positives and excessive focus on trivialities, as these are common, exhausting failure modes. Per-PR human guidance to provide context on the work and guide it towards the areas that need the most attention is generally more effective.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Reviewer 9: First half is just wording/flow changes. Second half is intended as useful advice, although it may not be particularly feasible WRT most "review bots" per se.

Author: I took the first half of this, I like that it's more direct. I didn't take the second half because the policy is already quite long and I don't think it adds much.

    - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed. It's ok to require a *response* to each comment but the response can be "the bot's wrong here".
        - In other words, reviewers must explicitly endorse an LLM comment before blocking a PR. They are responsible for their own analysis of the LLM's comment and cannot treat it as a CI failure.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to private use of an LLM for reviews; see ✅ above.

All of these **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

## Appendix

> ### No witch hunts

Reviewer: I don't have a concrete suggestion so won't block on this, but personally, I only used the term "witch hunt" colloquially and don't think it's a very good choice for policy.

The term is loaded enough that it has the issue that people might try and overzealously *not* classify what they're doing as a witch hunt because "I'm not being that extreme/rude about it," rather than the focus being that it's both a waste of time and hostile to the project to create an environment where people are being constantly questioned.

If I had to suggest an alternative, "Don't be a cop" is maybe a better way to word this, but again, I don't really have a good alternative and would rather not block on this.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..815da6eaed40bb1b045cc89d37fa4287e505744f)*

Reviewer 9: Having read this section, I agree. It's not really about witch hunting. To me, the key distinction here is that witch hunts involve an element of "gather a mob", that is not mentioned at all here.

"It is not your job to play detective" feels like it captures the spirit better here.

["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).
Do not try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.

> If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.
If there is a problem that needs to be fixed (such as excessive bolding, undue hype or a stiff tone), address that directly, regardless of your private suspicions of its origin.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Reviewer 8: @alice-i-cecile I don't think calling out the specific examples is useful here, and it would add another point to have to reach consensus on. Also, this would be directly instructing people to address that problem rather than the LLM usage, when it is *also* a perfectly reasonable option to just not engage, or close the PR, or similar.

Reviewer 9: Retracted: this should not be done to ensure a consensus policy can be reached :)

Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM is an instant [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.

> If you are not sure where you fall in this policy, please talk to us.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to us.
```
Behavior-language, not person-language.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Don't try to hide it.

### Responsibility

> All contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on LLMs that you have used.
```
Clarity / wording.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally authored by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

> ### "originally authored"

Reviewer: Personally, I think this would be better to put near the beginning instead of the end, since it *is* defining a term for use in the document. I don't think this is a pressing concern, just for flow reasons.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..815da6eaed40bb1b045cc89d37fa4287e505744f)*

Author: I want the beginning of the policy to start with what's banned and allowed, very clearly and plainly. I think "originally authored" is clear enough on its own that it's fine for it to come after the main text.

> ### "originally authored"

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### The meaning of "originally authored"
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
### On "original authorship"
```

This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".

> No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Authorship sets the initial style and direction of a piece of work; later editing to alter that is both inefficient and imperfect.
```
I think this captures the essence of the argument without making claims that are likely to spark debate. "No amount of editing can..." is a very strong claim (see Ship of Theseus) and a weaker form is still completely sufficient to justify this policy.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I don't want to water down this statement. I think the suggested edit is less direct and doesn't get across what we mean. We already have several provisions for "LLM authorship is ok as long as [significant caveats]", we don't need to change the meaning of "authorship".

Reviewer 9: Valid :)

> No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In the manner the phrase is used in this policy, no amount of editing changes how something was "originally authored"; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.
```

Taking a different approach here, of narrowing the focus to the phrasing in *this policy*, rather than trying to get people to agree with the fully general statement.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

### Non-exhaustive policy

This policy does not aim to be exhaustive.
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Usages that do not use LLMs for creation and do not show LLM output to another human are likely allowed ✅ 
- Usages that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌

This policy is not set in stone.

> We can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
We can and likely will evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..17a35f405be7d852ba4bb97be13279a34465b5cd)*

Author: I do not want to make forward-looking statements in this policy.

Reviewer 9: Good choice!

## LLM Usage Policy

For additional information about the policy itself, see [the appendix](#appendix).

### Overview

Using an LLM while working on `rust-lang/rust` is conditionally allowed.
However, we find it important to keep the following points in mind:

- Many people find LLM-generated code and writing deeply unpleasant to read or review.

> - Many people find LLMs to be a significant aid to learning and discovery.

Reviewer 12: This feels pretty incomplete to me. Every time I read this I find myself mentally disregarding what comes because it doesn't capture my experience, which is that they are more than these two things. Here is an attempt to expand it:

```suggestion
- Many people find LLMs to be a significant aid to learning and discovery.
- Some people find LLMs a powerful tool for authoring code. But others find the code frequently contains subtle bugs that are hard to find, particularly when the person working with the LLM is not familiar with the codebase and thus not able to review it effectively.
```

    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.
- Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.
    - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics.

> - Code changes that are originally authored by an LLM.

Reviewer 13: This feels overly restrictive in the current wording in a way that I'm not sure I really am comfortable *not* raising a concern as compiler team member.

There is some nuance here that this doesn't capture that I think should be. Certainly, I think *in general*, I'm happy to ban "unsolicited" code that is LLM-generated, but I think that an outright ban on *all* "non-trivial" LLM-generated code is too strong. I'd like to see LLM-generated code allowed under the following strong caveats:
- The reviewer is pre-decided, and has agreed to review LLM-generated code
  - Importantly, this does *not* mean a PR can be opened and *then* picked up by an "LLM-friendly" reviewer
- The code is *well-reviewed* (meaning, that the reviewer is committing to ensuring they fully understand the code, well enough that they could easily have written it themselves; and the author has *also* reviewed the code)
- Changes are "non-critical" (such as a non-compiler tool, code under a feature gate, diagnostics, etc.)

I personally think this is a pretty reasonable space to carve out for "experimentation": it doesn't subject reviewers who don't want to review LLM-generated code to unwanted reviews, it helps to ensure that code stays high-quality, and it limits fallback of any "mistakes" in the process.

Reviewer 9: "The code is well-tested" is another valuable caveat to add here. Requiring this is much less onerous in the context of LLM-assisted code.

Reviewer 13: I like it. I think it's a standard we *want* to hold for all contributions, but doesn't always get met. It's a nice position to have here.

  - This does not include "trivial" changes that do not meet the [threshold of originality](https://fsfe.org/news/2025/news-20250515-01.en.html), which fall under ⚠️ below.
    We understand that while asking an LLM research questions it may, unprompted, suggest small changes where there really isn't another way to write it.

>     However, you must still type out the changes yourself; you cannot give the LLM write access to your source code.

Reviewer 13: This is very weird to me. Either the change is small enough to be trivial, or it is not. I'm not sure what typing it out does?

Beyond this, it's not clear what this is aimed at? Is this aimed at when someone is conversing back and forth with an agent and they say "I suggest you do XYZ", or is this aimed at autocomplete-like code generation.

Author: I've removed the requirement to type out the code yourself.

>     - We do not accept PRs made up solely of trivial changes.

Reviewer 13: This is really just not correct. We accept all the time trivial changes (e.g. renaming a struct because it's confusing).

It's sort of like what Josh is saying: what does "trivial" mean.

Author: I've reworded this significantly, let me know what you think.

      See [the compiler team's typo fix policy](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/contributing.html#writing-documentation:~:text=Please%20notice%20that%20we%20don%E2%80%99t%20accept%20typography%2Fspellcheck%20fixes%20to%20internal%20documentation).
  - See also "learning from an LLM's solution" in ⚠️ below.
- Treating an LLM review as a sufficient condition to merge or reject a change.
  LLM reviews, if enabled by a team, **must** be advisory-only.

>   Teams can have a policy that code can be merged without review, and they can have a policy that code must be reviewed by at least one person,

Reviewer 13: Given that this is limited to rust-lang/rust, probably better to just restrict to no LLM reviews.

Author: I actually really want to keep allowing LLM reviews. I think they're low-risk and give people a chance to see whether the bot catches real issues.

  but they may not have a policy that an LLM counts as a person.
    - ℹ️ See "review bots" in ⚠️ below.
    - ℹ️ An LLM review does not substitute for self-review. Authors are expected to review their own code before posting and after each change.

#### ⚠️ Allowed with caveats
The following are decided on a case-by-case basis.
Please avoid them where possible.
In general, existing contributors will be treated more leniently here than new contributors,
since they've already established trust with their reviewers.
We may ask you for the original prompts or design documents that went into the LLM's output;
please have them on-hand, and be available to personally answer questions about your process.

> We may also ask for the exact LLM model used to generate the output.

Reviewer 13: >Please avoid them where possible.

I think this wording should be removed.

>will be treated more leniently

I'm not sure what this is supposed to mean: "existing contributors are allowed to do this more than new contributors", "existing contributors aren't scrutinized but new contributors will be"?

>We may ask you for the original prompts or design documents that went into the LLM's output;
please have them on-hand, and be available to personally answer questions about your process.
>We may also ask for the exact LLM model used to generate the output.

What purpose does this solve? It doesn't even really apply except to the first point anyways?

Author: I agree that these are no longer relevant now that we don't allow LLMs for non-trivial code generation. I've reworked this intro significantly, let me know what you think.

> - Using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style.

Reviewer 13: Of course, see my comment on the "Code changes that are originally authored by an LLM." ban, but I *do* like laying out this "less-restrictive" point explicitly. I would move the "asking for details about how you generated the solution" to under this point, but modify it heavily.

Rather than stating like "we need to know exactly what you said to the LLM and what model you used", I think a *better* approach is saying something like "You should be prepared to share the details of the direction you gave to the LLM. These may include general prompts or design documents/constraints."

I'm not sure that sharing the exact prompts or output, or the exact model does anything. What's the reasoning? I'm *much* more interested in what direction the author intended to take.

If the idea is to be able to "recreate" or "oversee" what the author did, that's just never going to work. This isn't something we can reasonably expect reviewers at large to do. Rather, if anything, this is something that I could see from a more mentor/mentee relationship. If it ever is at the point that a "random" reviewer wanted or needed to see this, then the PR likely just needs to be closed and further discussion should happen elsewhere before continuing.

- Using machine-translation (e.g. Google Translate) from your native language without posting your original message.
  Doing so can introduce new miscommunications that weren't there originally, and prevents someone who speaks the language from providing a better translation.
    - ℹ️ Posting both your original message and the translated version is always ok, but you must still disclose that machine-translation was used.

> - Using an LLM as a "review bot" for PRs.

Reviewer 14: Maybe I'm OOTL but I find this section situationally strange — where did the "review bot" come from? 

IME AI-powered review bots that directly participates in PR discussions (esp the "app" ones) are configured by repository owner, but AFAIK r-l/r (which this policy applies solely to) did not have any such bots. I highly doubt a contributor will bring in their own review bot in public. So practically this has to be either

* someone requested a review from Copilot, which may be we can opt-out?
* the *reviewer* outsourced the review work to a coding agent, which is already covered in the sections
* at least one *team* actually considered enabling such review bots in the future? as this is linked previously in that "*Teams can have a policy that code can be merged without review*" part, but I don't think this will ever happen given the the stance of this policy

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..7cd8c17b33384f79f0d1758f0e6989b582d9c3a6)*

Reviewer 10: > I highly doubt a contributor will bring in their own review bot in public.

I wish it worked like that :( People can just trigger GitHub copilot, or I suppose any other review bot, and let it comment on a r-l/r PR. Some people don't even do it willingly, but GH does it automatically for them, as GH copilot has a tendency to re-enable itself even if you sometimes disable it.

It is also not possible to opt-out of the PR author requesting a Copilot review, if I remember correctly.

Reviewer 15: I’ve seen this behavior elsewhere on GitHub, where contributors effectively use a personal account as a kind of "review bot" to comment on PRs without approval from maintainers.

Reviewer 14: > It is also not possible to opt-out of the PR author requesting a Copilot review, if I remember correctly.

Yeah currently disabling review is a personal/[license-owner](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/how-tos/administer-copilot/manage-for-enterprise/manage-agents/manage-copilot-code-review#disabling-copilot-code-review-in-your-repositories) setting, it is [not possible](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/155923) to configure from the repository PoV :disappointed:  but I think this is something that we may bring up to GitHub. 

It may be possible to use [content exclusion](https://docs.github.com/en/copilot/how-tos/configure-content-exclusion/exclude-content-from-copilot) to blind Copilot, but I'm not sure if this hack is going to produce any overreaching effects (e.g. affecting private IDE usage too).

Reviewer 16: > someone requested a review from Copilot, which may be we can opt-out?

I *think* this is exactly the point of pointing that out in our policy. Some people trigger a "[at]copilot review" in our repos without asking us for consent. This is rude behaviour and we don't want that.

And, yes, as you point out opting out of this "trigger" is currently only a project-wide setting, not at a repository level so we are looking with GitHub if they could make this setting more fine-grained ([here on Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/242791-t-infra/topic/automatic.20copilot.20review/near/563219236) a discussion with the Infra team)

Reviewer 14: Well I wouldn't say it's "rude" because GitHub's UI makes it so easy to request a review from Copilot, even manually 😅 

<img width="403" height="175" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/19563ba7-27eb-4fd2-bc23-38be42e3130e" />

IMO this is caused by a decision from the upstream (GitHub), so should better be solved at the GitHub level. This policy about "review bot" is only stop-gap workaround, and placing the burden on the wrong parties. I think we should explore more about disabling Copilot review "statically" (e.g. through GitHub implementing such option; banning Copilot (user ID 175728472) from making comment; using the instruction files etc), rather than relying on a policy.

Not saying that this section should be removed, but maybe informatively explain that "requesting review from Copilot on a PR is typically not welcomed".

Reviewer 16: yes I agree, it's a "UI decision" that ends up enabling rude or, if you prefer, unsettling behaviours. I'd like that this policy makes that clear.

> ℹ️ Review bots that post without being approved by a maintainer will be banned.

I think this covers enough the "do not prompt LLM reviews on rust-lang/ without consent" part.

Author: @clarfonthey I understand you are frustrated but it doesn't help to take it out on the people we're working with. Can I ask you to take a break from commenting on this RFC for a bit? Feel free to DM me with any concerns you have about the policy itself.

Reviewer: yeah, you're right; I deleted the comment

Reviewer 15: > I’ve seen this behavior elsewhere on GitHub, where contributors effectively use a personal account as a kind of "review bot" to comment on PRs without approval from maintainers.

Unsolicited review bots are becoming an increasing problem; for example: https://web.archive.org/web/20260426133344/https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/issues/16893#issuecomment-4321880160

Reviewer 17: Thank you for flagging xtqqczze - the same bot has commented in 6+ issues on the rust-clippy repo and in my case was giving unsolicited advice in a completely derailing direction (solving a specific case I obviously already worked around rather than the general case https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy/issues/16901#issuecomment-4321858119)

Reviewer 14: @xtqqczze  both rust-lang/rust-clippy#16893 and rust-lang/rust-clippy#16901 are issues not PRs, and that `@QEEK-AI` account commented spontaneously without any summoning. So I don't think these instances fall under this "Review Bot" rule (which is still "**⚠️ Allowed with caveats**"). At the very least these are "Comments […] authored by an LLM" which is "**❌ Banned**", and they are also outright "spam" that the current CoC can already handle.

Reviewer 18: I find this review bot policy to be a messy compromise that doens't seem to be serving anyone particularly well. Speaking from general experience, it is rather frustrating as a reviewer to be met with a review request that has then already been answered by an LLM. Even if a maintainer allows the bot, that doesn't necessarily mean that the reviewer consents to it. I think contributors and reviewers who wish to use LLMs for review are better served by running these tools locally, in compliance with the other policies. I propose removing the language around review bots.

    - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed. It's ok to require a *response* to each comment but the response can be "the bot's wrong here".
        - In other words, reviewers must explicitly endorse an LLM comment before blocking a PR. They are responsible for their own analysis of the LLM's comment and cannot treat it as a CI failure.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to private use of an LLM for reviews; see ✅ above.

All of these **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

## Appendix

### It's not your job to play detective
["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).
Do not try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.
If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.

Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM is an instant [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.
If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to us.

> Don't try to hide it.

Reviewer 13: I would be slightly stronger here: lying about whether you've used an LLM *or how* is instant CoC violation

I would *also* say that *under good intent*, failure to follow these policies is *generally* not immediately bannable, but repeated use after a warning is.

Who is "us"? Where does someone go?

Reviewer 12: What does something being an "instant CoC violation" actually mean? The [moderation team policies](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/#moderation) suggests a warning:

> * Moderators will first respond to such remarks with a warning.
> * If the warning is unheeded, the user will be “kicked,” i.e., kicked out of the communication channel to cool off.
> * If the user comes back and continues to make trouble, they will be banned, i.e., indefinitely excluded.

Author: Good comments all; I've revised this portion significantly.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally authored by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

### The meaning of "originally authored"

> This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".

Reviewer 15: I’m not comfortable with the definition of "originally authored" as written here. Authorship is something that applies to a person, not tools; a LLM can generate text, but it isn’t an author.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..7cd8c17b33384f79f0d1758f0e6989b582d9c3a6)*

No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

### Non-exhaustive policy

This policy does not aim to be exhaustive.
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Usages that do not use LLMs for creation and do not show LLM output to another human are likely allowed ✅ 
- Usages that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌

This policy is not set in stone.

> We can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Reviewer 12: I would feel better if we made this policy explicitly time-limited or tied to a process of gathering more information.

Reviewer: Niko, you're one of the loudest voices trying to dictate the direction we're going. I would argue that a majority of the pushback from sensible policies like this one have come from you; since you're effectively *the* project manager for the project, your voice carries further than a dozen people's, and it feels like you're genuinely oblivious to this. Plus, a lot of the arguments you've offered have been from the position that whatever you think is reasonable is canonically reasonable, which is perspective that resists all form of negotiation.

We all agree that this policy is not going to be permanent, but a large portion of the project seems to be in agreement that this should be the policy we adopt until a project-wide policy is adopted.

It's also worth noting, since it's been brought up multiple times, that we don't do policy by majority vote. This is even true for a policy like this one: if we did majority vote, we'd just ban all LLM usage, but we're not doing that because we're willing to compromise.

Right now, it seems pretty unsubstantiated that a handful of voices have dictated this position. While it's true that a small number of people have been active in the policy channel, a majority of the project have pointed out their desire for a total ban on LLM usage. This, being noticeably more lenient on that, is a compromise from us. You should consider whether you're willing to compromise at all on your stance, and what compromise would mean for you.

As I mentioned in one of the discussions, I do think it's a false equivalence that both sides need to concede something, *but* if you don't even know what it means to compromise, then negotiation is utterly impossible. I really am not convinced that you understand what a compromise of the pro-LLM position would be, based upon the utter confusion you've expressed when mentioning that some of the contributions you've done would not be acceptable under some of the proposed policies.

Reviewer: Do not plan to actually engage in this conversation any further (I acknowledge my biases and when to step out), but I think it's worth pointing out to the at-least-5 people who gave a thumbs-down reaction to my comment that I personally have a rule when it comes to this.

If I ever decide to mark my dissent on a comment with the thumbs-down emoji, I always reply explaining why unless everything I wish to say has already been said. Many times, the result is far more critical to the poster than a simple emoji, but I do this because I genuinely want people to understand why I feel a particular way, rather than just saying "I don't like this and will not explain why." We don't improve if we don't know what's wrong.

My above comment, in my mind, is *required* to give Niko's a thumbs-down reaction, because otherwise I'm being insincere to him and everyone else reading. I do not say that I disagree with something without saying why; in that case, it's better to not say anything at all.

Again, I acknowledge that my explanation can be deeply hurtful. Disagreement is a painful but necessary process. I also know that there are plenty of times where I have been excessively hurtful without providing the relevant constructive feedback, and think it's worth calling me out for that.

I don't apply my standards to anyone else. Lots of people just don't have time to write up a full response. But I personally, in these cases, simply don't respond at all.

So, consider whether your simple thumbs-down emoji constitutes genuinely useful feedback, or whether you're just being excessively hurtful instead. And, if you would like to express your dissent in private, I'm open to DMs on Zulip too; this is an open invitation to just say what you feel without a filter. It would be hypocritical of me to be so blunt with my opinions and not accept the same in kind.

Reviewer 19: I'll reply here since this is 'the thread', but I want to say first that I don't agree with much of what you wrote @clarfonthey. I believe Niko is raising a concern in good faith, though I'd like to understand it better.

> I would feel better if we made this policy explicitly time-limited or tied to a process of gathering more information.

@nikomatsakis, can you elaborate on specifically what information you think we should be seeking, and what process you're imagining for iterating towards a better policy? Are you seeking commitment from folks who have engaged so far to *keep* engaging in discussion on Zulip? Something else? I'd be happy to chat offline (Zulip or more sync meeting if you'd prefer) if that makes more sense.

I see @jyn514 left a comment below with some more data on project opinions, but it's not clear to me if that's the kind of data you're seeking, or something else. Could you elaborate on what you're looking for and what kinds of process/timeline you would find better than the copious discussion and iteration that has landed us on this (and some other) proposals?

I personally think a policy like this one that is relatively restrictive, but scope-limited and leaving room for usage in other areas of the Project gives us a good balance for continued input on where the world is and leaving the door open for private usage for those comfortable with doing so. That combination seems guaranteed to ensure we're not going to stop discussing since everyone seems to want something different from this policy, even if we manage to get to consensus on landing this in the meantime.

Reviewer 12: I appreciate the vote of confidence, Mark. And @clarfonthey I appreciate that I have reputational clout in the project -- though I'd also note that it doesn't usually translate into me getting my way without fighting for it tooth and nail. =) In any case, I wouldn't be speaking up this much if I didn't feel it was important.

To answer your questions Mark:

> Are you seeking commitment from folks who have engaged so far to keep engaging in discussion on Zulip? 

No, I think the Zulip discussions are not useful. I want to see a more structured process. I think it would look like this:

* First, there'd be a group of people who are working to form a policy. This would be a representative, high-trust group that contains some folks from various positions here. And for the record, I don't particularly want to be in it. =)
* Second, I think it'd be useful to take the next step to making the qualitative data we gained on Rust Project Perspectives into quantitative data. I talked about this on Zulip a few times but one idea is to do targeted polling to try and figure out "how widely are each of the major families of concerns shared" and "what is the texture". 

For example, @jyn514 has expressed openness to having a separate review queue for "LLM-authored content". How many others on the compiler team share that opinion? I have no idea. And of course @clarfonthey has expressed ethical concerns, and I don't really know how many people share that bright red line. And that's just existing maintainers, what about people who've opened PRs in the last year? How many of them work with LLMs at work or on a daily basis? What are there experiences like?

Another thing I'm very curious to understand, something I think could be useful, is -- what are people *afraid* of or *hopeful for* as a result of this policy. That might inform the conversation.

For example, for me, one of my big fears is that if we will be distancing ourselves from future contributors, many of whom will be coding with LLMs. When Rust started, we made a deliberate choice to use Github and not Bugzilla because, frankly, Github is where the people are. I would be interested to see if the perspectives around LLM usage vary between existing maintainers and future contributors or along other lines.

Reviewer 20: According to https://rethinkpriorities.org/research-area/adoption-llms-tech-workers/ 91% of respondants have used LLMs for work with 29% using it daily.

This data is a year old now, and I have many reasons to believe usage of tools like Claude Code has only increased since then, and dramatically at that. Of the four tech companies I have direct knowledge of, all four have gone from AI being used for coding by a minority of developers, to being used by almost every developer for coding in that time. In two of them using AI coding tools is practically mandatory. It's also quite clear to everyone that companies like Anthropic are struggling to keep up with the growth in usage.

I personally have approached AI with extreme skepticism from the beginning, and I still consider its functionality to be dramatically oversold by the companies selling it, but it's extremely widely used already, is already a very effective tool when used correctly, and I think @nikomatsakis is absolutely correct in thinking this will distance contributors who would use it, which is now essentially all new programmers.

Reviewer 21: At the company I work for, it's also the case that most people use AI quite a bit; however, multiple *new* employees have expressed that they don't want to use it much or at all because it could interfere with learning. They want to go from junior engineers to senior engineers, and the best way we know to do that is hands-on experience.

So I agree that it's become an industry standard (and policies which do not reflect this may be unsustainable); however, it's not necessarily true that all new programmers will be AI users initially.

> We can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Reviewer 13: I want to second @nikomatsakis's point, mostly: I'm not sure that I necessarily care that this is "time limited", but with as-restrictive as this is, I don't want us to merge this and think it is "enough". I also don't know what "correct" here looks like. Let me try to spell out exactly what I would and would not like:

- I *would like* for us to gather more/better quantitative of AI usage within the Project, and among *contributors* to the Project.
- I *would like* for us to continue discussing what a *Project-wide* policy looks like and find consensus.
- I *would like* for us to evaluate/monitor *actual effectiveness* of this policy once we merge.
  - Does this "reduce the spam"? Is it easier to moderate? Do maintainers feel less burdened?
  - Are there things that we missed in this policy? Are there parts of the policy that just don't seem to be a problem?
- I *would like* for us to re-evaluate as models change, as the ecosystem changes, as best-practices change, etc.
- I *would like* for us to identify clearly the problems that we are trying to solve, evaluate *alternative* solutions than a "restrictive AI policy", and then evaluate how this policy fits with those solutions.
- I *would not like* for us to assume that this policy is "as permissive as it gets" nor "as restrictive as it gets".
- I *would not like* for us to broadcast this as an "anti-AI" stance. (Rather, I want to set this as a "we're figuring things out, and we need to focus on maintainers and quality until we do.")
- I *would not like* for this policy to let us stop treating contributors with respect (*regardless* of AI use)
- I *would not like* for us to disregard how AI is used outside the Project and how the policies we set affect our relationships with individuals, companies, and organizations

In all, I think best said:

I don't want us to think of this policy as "done". I want it to be as another stepping stone in figuring out what works. I don't think "only talking" gets us very far (which is why *some policy*, even if more restrictive or less restrictive than some would like, is still a good step), but I don't think that this is a "solution", only another means to help us figure out what works for the Project. I don't want us to merge this and then any time we are discussing, someone can just point and say: "look, we merged a policy, why are we still discussing this?"

Unfortunately, we're bad at ensuring we don't set something down and forget to pick it up again. A time-limited or event-limited policy can help with this. If we said "this policy is only in effect for a year", then in a year, we *must* reevaluate whether this policy "worked" and what changes (if any, should be made). I'm not sure what an "event-limited" process would look like: but I could imagine it's some combination of doing a survey, identifying key "events" like e.g. a capable/free "open model" being available, additional tooling being built that could obviate the need for some of this policy, the Project gaining consensus on a Project-wide policy, some team raising a concern, etc.

I imagine what we *actually* want is some combination. Just taking a stab:

> This policy is not set in stone, and can be amended with a simple majority of members of teams using rust-lang/rust (without concerns).
> This policy can be dissolved in a few ways:
>   - Consensus (n-2) of all members of teams using rust-lang/rust (without concerns)
>   - A formal Project-wide policy in place *AND* 1 year passing since this policy is first merged
>   - An objective concern raised about active harm the policy is having on the reputation of Rust, with evidence; as decided by a leadership council FCP (consensus without conerns)

Author: > An objective concern raised about active harm the policy is having on the reputation of Rust, with evidence; as decided by a leadership council FCP

👍 I like the idea of having an escape hatch if there's a crisis.

> Consensus (n-2) of all members of teams using rust-lang/rust (without concerns)

I think this is implied, but 👍 to spelling it out explicitly.

> A formal Project-wide policy in place AND 1 year passing since this policy is first merged

I don't like that this leaves no room for a project-wide policy that allows teams to set more specific policies.

Reviewer 9: If there's a sunset clause, what's the fallback policy? Ideally it's a policy that *everyone* dislikes, so there's incentive to properly fix it.

The current status quo seems to be... fully permissive but also people will get mad at you if you submit LLM-generated work? That seems less than ideal.

Reviewer 13: This is my second point includes not just time passing, but *also* the Project-wide policy (which is, I guess, the "fallback"). I don't necessarily everyone think has to *dislike* that, but rather that needs to be something more fundamentally shared across the *entire* project than a rust-lang/rust specific policy.

The other two points are an *active* dissolution than fundamentally requires either consensus (same as *forming* the policy), or evidence of active harm.

## LLM Usage Policy

For additional information about the policy itself, see [the appendix](#appendix).

> ### Overview

Reviewer 22: While this policy hasn't made everyone happy, I think it's struck a reasonable balance that seems to have resonated with a decent number of people. I think one of the reasons for that is that it avoids too much "framing".

By "framing", I'm thinking about how we introduce the policy; how we talk about our thinking on AI as a project; and what the basis for a policy is. I think there's still a decent amount of disagreement on that and this explains why it's been a little difficult to make this more or less restrictive.

There are two dominant starting points in our discussions so far - some of the project are starting from a position of "use of these tools are unethical for various reasons, therefore I don't think we should have anything to do with them, and so my starting point in this discussion is to prohibit all use" ("the ethical framing"), and others don't fully share those ethical concerns, so their starting position is "we've always let people whatever tools they want, and only introduced restrictions when they could be justified by an impact on the ability of the project to do its job (i.e. impact social cohesion, quality of the toolchain, sustainability of reviews, etc)" ("the pragmatic framing"). Starting points like these constitute the basis for any policy in the project - on what grounds we're imposing a restriction or permitting something - and this policy doesn't have much of one.

This policy focuses mostly on what we permit or restrict, and while it touches on why briefly, it doesn't say too much - so you can read it as "these are the things I'm willing to compromise on from a prohibition on everything" *or* as "these are the restrictions we've landed on that are justified by impacts on the project".

My concern is that without framing, we leave people to fill the gaps themselves and come to their own (potentially incorrect) conclusions about what the basis for this policy is. Within the project, that could be a problem if someone proposes a future change to this policy, because the author might have a "pragmatic framing" - seeing their amendment as justified by what we then know about the impact on the project - while a reviewer might see the amendment as an unreasonable ask for more compromise on total prohibition, as they understood the basis for this policy as coming from an "ethical framing". Outside the project, people might read this and see it as the project making an endorsement of AI because it permits some use, because they are inferring an "ethical framing", when an explanation of the "pragmatic framing" might be have cleared that up.

I think the appropriate framing for the project to take with regards to policies like this is the "pragmatic framing". We're all entitled to our ethical concerns and criticisms of LLMs, and those perspectives are absolutely valid, but I believe it's very tricky to make them a solid basis for policy that encourages a diverse and varied community such as ours to work together. To give a silly example: if had the strong stance that we should ban all contributions that didn't use British English, because that's objectively correct and there's a King who'll say so, and that was a strong ethical/moral stance for me (feel free to replace this with a stance that you find more compelling), then how do we decide what to do with that? Others will disagree, so who wins? Whose ethical stance is correct? We could litigate the actual debate - but I don't think any of us want that. We could just pick the side of the person with the concern - but then we're effectively proscribing a "correct view" for contributors to have, and the more we do that, the fewer people will agree with every concern that has become policy - alienating more people from the project. It just isn't a tenable basis for policy. It might have been ten years ago with a much younger Rust, but for almost any issue, the ship has sailed, we've already got valued contributors who disagree on most topics. I want to be part of a project where we can each have our strongly-held perspectives, as long as we treat each other with dignity and respect, and can co-exist with those who might disagree - an issue is only relevant when it affects the project's ability to do its job (as some of the concerns with AI are keen demonstrations of, though not all of them).

As such, I think the only practical basis for this policy is the "pragmatic framing", and as I've said above, I think we should include some preamble to any policy like this that describes the basis for the policy. I'm reminded of @nikomatsakis's [earlier wording along these lines](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/392734-council/topic/Project.20perspectives.20on.20AI/near/580301943):

> There is not yet a full consensus within the Rust org about when/how/where it is acceptable to use AI-based tools. Many members of the Rust community find value in AI; many others feel that its negative impact on society and the climate are severe enough that no use is acceptable. Still others are working out their opinion.
>
> Despite these differences, there are many common goals we all share:
>
> - Building a community of deep experts in our collective projects.
> - Building an inclusive community where all feel welcome and respected.
>
> We are therefore adopting a nuanced policy aimed at promoting these goals while allowing for individuals to differ in other ways.

I had some similar phrasing in early sketches I had from a while back:

> Unfortunately, it's simply impossible to do that [say what Rust's position on AI is]. For this statement to come to a single conclusion on the practical and ethical concerns around AI, the Rust project would need to agree on any of these issues, and we don't!
> 
> That shouldn't come as any surprise. Rust is built by over 200 people from different countries, cultures, backgrounds and experiences - there are going to be very few things we all agree on, that's inevitable. Our diversity has always been our strength - Rust has always strived to be a project where we can put aside our differences, treat each other with dignity and respect, and focus on building the best programming language that we can.

I don't want this comment to expand the scope of this policy too much - it's good that it is narrow and specific and concise, but I think it'll be easier to get people on-board when we're clear about the basis for the policy, as that has implications for whether it can evolve, and also in avoiding misinterpretation. I'm not tied to any of the specific phrasing in the quotes above, but feel free to use them as a starting point if inclined to act on this comment.

Author: <3 I like this a lot and I think it's the core of what makes this policy work. I've made this "overview" section shorter, but added a longer "motivation and guiding principles" section towards the end, with a modified version of Niko's quote.

    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.
- Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.
    - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics.

> - Code changes that are originally authored by an LLM.

Reviewer 22: I'd quite like to see an explicit carve out for teams or even individuals to do some experimentation - in specific areas or with specific maintainers that wouldn't affect maintainers who aren't interested in participating. Teams would obviously need to decide if they wanted to have such an experiment, but it would be useful input to any future revisions - e.g. "hey, we tried this in a controlled environment over here and we actually found it useful and helpful, maybe we could consider relaxing this point", etc.

All of these **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

## Appendix

### Moderation policy
#### It's not your job to play detective
["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).
Do not try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.
If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.

#### Be honest
Conversely, lying about whether or how you've used an LLM is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.
If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to the [moderation team](mailto:rust-mods@rust-lang.org).
Don't try to hide it.

#### Penalties
The policies below follow the same guidelines as the code of conduct:
Violations will first result in a warning, and repeated violations may result in a ban.
- 🔨 Comments from a personal account originally authored by an LLM
- 🔨 Violations of the "Be honest" section

Other violations are left up to the discretion of reviewers and moderators.

> For most cases we recommend closing and locking the PR or issue, but not escalating further.

Reviewer 23: I think it's wrong to treat all violations of AI policy as CoC violations.

When someone submits a PR they wrote with AI assistance and you don't want to merge it, the correct response is just to close the PR and explain to them why it was closed. We should not threaten such contributors with moderation warnings. There really is no reason to tack on a "this is a *warning* and future violations may result in a ban" on to that explanation. It's an unnecessarily hostile experience to receive that.

Of course, at some point it does become a CoC issue and/or ban-worthy. For example, if you repeatedly don't follow instructions from the maintainers, that's a problem and I think it's fine to ban them for that. Or if it's obviously spam from OpenClaw or whatever, then ban them as spam. That's fine. But we should not treat human contributors like that on first violation.

As an aside on disclosure. I think it's probably right to treat lying as a CoC issue when intentional. This is why I feel somewhat uncomfortable with a disclosure requirement to begin with, though I'm okay with having one, assuming no witch hunts occur.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..593d5386c838d682a94fd8e55a72693fce9c546f)*

Author: Hm, I think I just phrased this poorly. The "code of conduct bit" is only meant to apply to the first two bullets, not to the paragraph on lines 103-104.

Reviewer 23: Why does the code of conduct bit extend to this one specifically?

> Comments from a personal account originally authored by an LLM

If a new contributor is replying to reviews by copy/pasting from an LLM, I certainly think we should tell them to stop, but I do not think it warrants a moderation warning, for the reasons I outlined above. I do not think this is at all comparable to outright lying.

Author: hm, ok. I have rewritten this section a bit and removed the bullet singling out comments from a personal account; does it look better now?

The policy's guidelines are roughly as follows:

> It's fine to use LLMs to answer questions, analyze, distill, refine, check, suggest, review. But not to **create**.

> LLMs work best when used as a tool to write *better*, not *faster*.

### Rules
#### Legend
- ✅ Allowed
- ❌ Banned
- ⚠️ Allowed with caveats. Must disclose that an LLM was used.
- ℹ️ Adds additional detail to the policy. These bullets are normative.

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).

>     - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.

Reviewer 24: In my opinion, it seems unnecessary to require the disclosure of LLM usage when finding bugs or flaws, if we're already requiring that a human verified the bug and wrote the report. Is there a particular reason that this disclosure requirement is here?

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..9a944f7db4bfa6cf25794458ddb9a2b451714069)*

Reviewer 25: I think disclosure of LLM use is critical because honesty is crucial for open source projects. If you claim credit for something that an LLM found, that is dishonest and corrosive to trust.

Reviewer 24: Fair point. I think I wasn't sure how literally this was meant to be taken, given that bug reports were singled out. In other words, is it only if the LLM played an essential role, or is it if the LLM was involved at all. Probably the latter case is explained by the other policies, like how it is acceptable to use LLMs for understanding.

Reviewer: Both avid LLM users and people who dislike LLMs are in favour of disclosure, so, it's not really controversial. LLMs work differently than humans do and knowing that one was involved can really help review.

Reviewer 24: I am not opposed to disclosure, and I agree that humans should not take credit for work done by an LLM. At the same time, I am concerned that given the environment surrounding AI usage in the project, issues and PRs that disclose any LLM usage will be subject to prejudice. I believe that reviewers should as much as possible judge PRs on their merits and their content, not based on what tools were involved in the creation process.

Reviewer: I don't think that the potential for harassment is a valid concern to avoid disclosure, especially since such harassment *is* explicitly against the rules anyway.

Reviewer 24: I agree, but harassment is distinct from and more extreme than what I was describing. I mean that some reviewers may be inclined to judge PRs based on the process of its creation rather than focusing on its actual quality.

Reviewer 26: When I see Claude as a contributor to a repository, I have a negative reaction.  I don't want disclosure to turn into us advertising for the AI companies, as though we're wearing their T-shirts.

It's in the interest of these companies to shift the conversation from "an *engineer* did X with the assistance of Linux, ripgrep, Google Search, Stack Overflow, rustc diagnostics, rust-analyzer, rustfmt, gdb, Python, Docker, LLVM, clang-analyzer, Miri, vi / Emacs / Helix / VS Code / Zed, and Claude Code" to "*Claude* did X".

So I worry about playing into this.  I worry that singling this out for disclosure, when we don't routinely disclose our other tools, may lead to a mindset that these models are *authors* rather than *tools*.  Maybe some people do see it that way, but I don't, and I think it's better if we don't.

That's one thing I worry about.

Reviewer 25: I am genuinely astonished by this comment!

LLMs are categorically not like all the other tools you mentioned. None of those tools can write a PR or a blog post for you. IMO you are fooling yourself to think otherwise. This is why there aren't huge controversial arguments about using those other tools.

If you think using an LLM makes you look bad, maybe you shouldn't use an LLM, rather than hiding the fact you are using an LLM.

Reviewer 15: > So I worry about playing into this. I worry that singling this out for disclosure, when we don't routinely disclose our other tools, may lead to a mindset that these models are _authors_ rather than _tools_.

This is a valid concern. For that reason, I do not believe `Co-authored-by: Claude` should be considered an acceptable form of disclosure. Labeling a LLM as a co-author risks reinforcing the idea that these systems are authors rather than tools. In my view, commits that misuse the trailer in this manner should not be considered mergeable.

Reviewer 25: I think "Co-Authored-By" is not a good form of disclosure. I think a sentence or two describing the nature of the LLM contribution is good. https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/155582 is an example.

Reviewer 26: I don't resonate with this *credit* framing.  Models feel like tools — computers that one programs with words.  They bring new and impressive capabilities, yes[^1], and that's what we expect new tools to do.  Optics changed painting.  Working from a projection or photograph lets humans do things with a paintbrush that are otherwise impossible.  And yet we don't require artists to disclose or feel that they've been stealing unearned credit.

[^1]: Though these tools are not yet capable of autonomously writing PRs or blog posts to a level that I'd consider acceptable.

We're not college professors grading students.  Using a calculator in a course might be cheating.  But we don't care.  If a calculator helps your PR, use it.

These models are calculators for words (and now, for code).  Anyway, I suspect that soon enough, these tools will be so pervasive that we'll all be bored of hearing about how others are using them.  (In fact, I suspect expectations will rapidly invert — long ago, it became impolite to ask a question web search could trivially answer or to submit a draft with errors that could have been caught with spell check.)

Using a tool is different from wearing the T-shirt.  Forced disclosure feels like forced cobranding.  I worry that will hurt quality.  Disclosure can be a kind of psychological *out* for errors.  I *want* people to take full credit — to singularly stake one's reputation on the PR without anyone or anything else to point at to excuse poor quality.[^2]

[^2]: And I'm not sure that each PR needs to be a kind of sales pitch for what a helpful tool Claude is, though I'm sure Anthropic would appreciate it.

Reviewer: I think that you're missing the purpose on why this rule exists.

Sure, if your LLM just points out some obvious error, like a part of the code which could panic due to an out-of-bounds access, or even something worse, it doesn't really matter how you found it. But for more complicated issues, there's a common issue of people scanning for issues and the methodology being a bit weird when an LLM is involved.

Here's an example: rust-lang/hashbrown#701

The contributor did the right thing and acknowledged that this was found by Claude. The methodology is *reasonable*: they're someone who isn't afraid to dive deep into the generated code and they've been constantly verifying things against the benchmarks. However, because they were using an LLM to scan for performance issues, there's a reasonable rate of false positives. Unlike other tools, you can easily find a lot of *plausible* solutions, and many more than any other method, but you still have to verify them individually. Compare this to a previous method where you would be less likely to find things searching manually, but due to the nature of the manual search, there's a lower chance of false positives.

(Also: it's just generally harder to verify a larger number of solutions, no matter how skilled you are. Especially if you don't really understand the way a solution was found, just that it was.)

In this case, it was helpful to know that the change was found using an LLM because it means we can apply that heightened scrutiny. And, as mentioned later in the thread, this is likely just an LLVM issue, not something we should be messing with in the code itself.

This isn't really an advertisement for Anthropic, or an indication that the person who filed it didn't know what they were doing. Rather, it was an invitation to know the bounds of the search for issues and to know what needs to be checked.

Would other tools, like fuzzing, also be useful to disclose when finding things like this? Yes, absolutely. It's just that people using fuzzers have to put in a lot more upfront work to get them set up and are much more likely to know what they're dealing with, and are much less common. Now, a large portion of the tech industry can just spin up one of these coding agents and unleash it on a code base and file what they find. So, we explicitly ask for disclosure on these tools specifically because they're so common *and* so easy to use, correctly or not. If another tool popped up with similar requirements, we'd want to request disclosure for that too.

Reviewer 2: I have a much worse reaction to finding out a contrib has LLM generated parts by noticing patterns. If you're transparent about it i bear no ill feelings, just possibly a lack of interest of reviewing it myself.

I am willing and enjoy reviewing 3kloc diff changes, if i know the author thought about the changes and i can review it with the author's intent behind it.

I will def be sceptical about someone's future contribs if i encountered LLM code without expecting it

Reviewer 26: I agree that tool use should be disclosed if one did not fully and completely verify the issue oneself, as one is then leaning on the correctness of the tool rather than on one's own personal judgment for reducing false positives.  Complete agreement there.

But I don't want people sending us those.  This is what I mean about:

> I worry that will hurt quality.  Disclosure can be a kind of psychological *out* for errors.

In saying, "oh, I used Claude to find this", it gives people an excuse for a high false-positive rate.  "Hey, don't blame me, Claude said it was a bug."

Do we want that at all?  The policy reads that we don't, as it requires that "you personally verify the bug".

Yet it also requires disclosure if someone uses these tools as a smart grep.  I don't see what's gained by that.  Even I would be likely to read into the disclosure an implication that the person didn't actually check it.  There's no way to counter that.  There's research on this:

- [Schilke and Reimann, The Transparency Dilemma: How AI Disclosure Erodes Trust](https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=5205850)
- [Cheong et al., Penalizing Transparency?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01418)

From the Schilke and Reimann paper:

> [O]ur research contributes to the literature on transparency by calling into question the widely held belief that transparency uniformly yields favorable outcomes.  The extant literature is dominated by a positive narrative, such that the notion that transparency enhances trust is often taken for granted, with the assumption that openness invariably bolsters trust...  [O]ur investigation demonstrates that transparency can backfire when one discloses AI usage.  Our work shows remarkable robustness of such disclosure’s trust-eroding effect across a wide variety of tasks and participants.  Ironically, people who try to be trustworthy—by transparently disclosing AI usage—are trusted less.

People who disclose LLM use are trusted less, holding contribution quality constant, even by people who use LLMs themselves, even when reviewers were already aware of the LLM use, even when the author asserts having reviewed and revised it, even when the author asserts the LLM was only used for proofreading, and even when the disclosure is mandated.

I worry about this eroding trust in our project.

---

Regarding PRs, if the code is not byte-for-byte identical with what the person would have written (given more time due to *slow hands*) without the assistance of an LLM, then I don't want it at this point.  I don't think we want those 3kloc PRs with quality problems that become obvious just below the surface.  For me, the issue on this goes beyond disclosure.

This policy effectively bans those anyway.  It allows only "using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style."  I doubt anyone is going to rewrite one of those 3kloc PRs using this method.

But it also requires disclosure even when writing from scratch, and I think it's an overreach to demand disclosure of things that people have learned from.  And, as above, I worry about it eroding trust.

Reviewer 2: right, I derailed this thread somewhat. The disclosure here is about issues. And there I'm not having a negative reaction. It's like a more directed fuzzers, and we already have disclosure of fuzzers by convention

Reviewer 24: That's part of why I found the explicit disclosure requirement a bit strange, since we already have conventions (but no requirements, AFAIK) for disclosure in the case of other tools, like fuzzers. I don't understand why we need to _require_ disclosure for bug-finding tools _specifically_ in the case of LLMs. However, mentioning how a bug was found is helpful even just for the purpose of analyzing what tools are most effective at finding which types of issues, so I don't have an issue with disclosure—it just seemed weird to me to single LLMs out.

Reviewer 3: Something that I haven't seen discussed here is disclosure as a mean to enforce the policy. It is usually possible to detect AI-written contributions, but except in extreme cases it is very hard to know whether that contribution abides our requirements, and even harder to *prove* it does not. If we require disclosure, failing to disclose is a violation of the policy and can be escalated to moderators on that basis alone. On the other hand if we don't, we need to find some other evidence, and this is much harder. Therefore I support disclosure *even if* it indeed erodes trust (which I do not believe it does).

Author: I agree with Chayim that disclosure is crucial to enforcement (under the same rationale as ["Interdicting crime is an iterated game"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/nonprofit-indicted-bank-fraud/#:~:text=The%20strategic%20logic%20of%20bank%20fraud%20charges%20in%20white%20collar%20indictments)).  I also think that disclosure *helps* with stigma by showing people that it's possible to write high-quality and useful changes that involve an LLM.

since they haven't yet established trust with their reviewers.

- Using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style.
- Using machine-translation (e.g. Google Translate) from your native language without posting your original message.
  Doing so can introduce new miscommunications that weren't there originally, and prevents someone who speaks the language from providing a better translation.
    - ℹ️ Posting both your original message and the translated version is always ok, but you must still disclose that machine-translation was used.
- Using an LLM as a "review bot" for PRs.
    - ℹ️ Review bots **must** have a separate GitHub account that marks them as an LLM.
      You **must not** post (or allow a tool to post) LLM reviews verbatim on your personal account unless clearly quoted with your own personal interpretation of the bot's analysis.
    - ℹ️ Review bot accounts must be blockable by individual users via the standard GitHub user-blocking mechanism. (Note that some GitHub "app" accounts post comments that look like users but cannot be blocked.)

>     - ℹ️ Review bots that post without being approved by a maintainer will be banned.

Reviewer 27: I'm concerned this leaves room for reviewers to trigger a review bot without consent of the author of the PR, which could alienate the PR author. If I opened a PR and it got reviewed by an LLM bot, I would probably close the PR and never try contributing to the project again. I've seen this [happen in another project](https://github.com/audacity/audacity/pull/8974). I think there should be an agreement between the reviewer and PR author before triggering a review bot.

Reviewer 14: "approved by a maintainer" is the key point here, if an LLM review bot is "approved by a maintainer" it means such is a public decision and should be mentioned in CONTRIBUTING.md, and that's the agreement.

Reviewer 27: An agreement among maintainers to impose LLM review bots on nonconsenting contributors would drive those contributors away.

Reviewer 27: If a reviewer *really* wants to use an LLM to review, they could run that LLM on their own, filter through the output to determine what is actually relevant and correct, and post in their own words about the identified problems. That doesn't require bothering a nonconsenting PR author with LLM output.

Reviewer 14: Rephrasing LLM output is already addressed in lines 67-68. 

The premise of this whole section is that somehow a bot (as a separate account, line 69) can be officially "⚠️ Allowed with caveats" (line 57) for reviewing. 

If you think that a review bot account should not be allowed, even if approved by maintainers, this whole thread would be more relevant on the parent item (line 66; I've commented about this [before](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3107220941)).

P.S. I don't think this policy implies any LLM review bot account will be allowed "right now" or "soon", I believe there must at least be an FCP.

Reviewer 27: > If a reviewer really wants to use an LLM to review, they could run that LLM on their own, filter through the output to determine what is actually relevant and correct, and post in their own words about the identified problems. That doesn't require bothering a nonconsenting PR author with LLM output.

Thinking about this further, this seems like an overall better process than having a review bot comment on a PR. There's no room for ambiguity about whether a PR author is responsible for responding to LLM output; only the reviewer who decides to use an LLM is in a position to interpret the LLM output because "Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM" are explicitly forbidden.

    - ℹ️ If a more reliable tool, such as a linter or formatter, already exists for the language you're writing, we strongly suggest using that tool instead of or in addition to the LLM.
    - ℹ️ Configure LLM review tools to reduce false positives and excessive focus on trivialities, as these are common, exhausting failure modes.

>     - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed. It's ok to require a *response* to each comment but the response can be "the bot's wrong here".

Reviewer 27: I don't think it's okay to require PR authors to have to say "the bot's wrong here"; the onus should be on whoever triggers the bot to determine whether there's any validity to what the bot posted.

Reviewer 14: > the onus should be on whoever triggers the bot to determine whether there's any validity to what the bot posted.

I don't see how line 73 disagrees with this. The statement *"It's ok to require a response"* refers to the **reviewer** requiring a response from the author to address the bot comment, not from the bot itself. The previous statement *"reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed."* also suggested that the **reviewer** has taken the 'onus' of the bot comment. In this scenario I don't find requiring the PR author to say "the bot's wrong here" to dismiss the comment is unfair to the author; in fact, having that 2nd step *"reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed"* means the PR author is in fact rejecting the combined analysis of the bot *and* the reviewer, so I'd say this is more biased against reviewers.

Reviewer 27: The current wording is a bit ambiguous and could conceivably be interpreted to mean that "it's okay to require a response" implicitly. I would like to see this clarified to say explicitly that a bot's comment only needs to be responded to if a reviewer explicitly indicates that.

Author: I'm just going to delete this last sentence altogether, I think it causes more confusion than it solves.

For most first-time violations we recommend closing and locking the PR or issue.

Using an LLM does **not** mean it's ok to harrass a contributor.
All contributors must be treated with respect.
The code-of-conduct applies to *all* conversations in the Rust project.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally authored by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

### The meaning of "originally authored"

This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".
No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

### Non-exhaustive policy

This policy does not aim to be exhaustive.
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Usages that do not use LLMs for creation and do not show LLM output to another human are likely allowed ✅ 

> - Usages that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌

Reviewer 28: (security-response hat)

This spirit bans a particularly valuable and _critical_ use of LLMs that the Rust project has today, one which rust-lang/rust is exposed to.

Currently, the Foundation is using Mythos to shore up Rust's security by discovering security bugs. This _must_ be done: if Mythos is ever made public then Rust needs to have gotten ahead of it.

This is leading to _vetted_ but AI generated reports making their way to the Rust teams, which will eventually show up in issues/PR bodies.

https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/155707#issuecomment-4309413267 and https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/155708#issuecomment-4309486388 are examples of such reports. They are pretty high quality. I think that PR would be worse without it.

The Foundation is putting significant effort into this: I think requiring them to rewrite reports is not necessary and will slow down what is an extremely critical process on a short timeline.

The security-response WG is still struggling with an influx of low-quality AI generated reports and in that sense I am quite happy when random reporters spend the time to formulate their reports better. But this is different: these are high quality, these are _solicited_, and we may not have the time to spend on making them better.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..9a944f7db4bfa6cf25794458ddb9a2b451714069)*

Reviewer: FWIW I think this particular issue might be reasonable to address using the point I left in my policy:

* Top-level issue descriptions must be free of nontrivial LLM usage, although this does not apply to comments, assuming the rest of the policy is followed. This is done to ensure that the triage team can quickly and easily triage issues, and for fairness, team members who can do triage themselves are still expected to abide by this rule.

This explicitly allows for the cases you included, where the top-level issue/PR description is a hand-written analysis of the situation, but you put the generated reports in comments underneath.

Note that I'm going to be substantially altering the text of this policy over the next few days, but this specific point will probably be left, where it's okay to include LLM output in comments and it won't be considered slop, although if they are spam they can be hidden. More useful stuff like the ones you included won't be considered spam.

Reviewer 28: Yeah. I think there's a very reasonable concern that people don't want to be talking to an LLM, so I'd even say it's fine to disallow LLM usage in the "main body" of comments. But including LLM output as supplemental materials is useful: supplemental materials can be ignored; but the issue is worse off if they were not included in the first place.

Author: I have allowed anyone to post LLM content in comments as long as it's clearly quoted and doesn't replace their own words and understanding. ~~I've made a couple special carve-outs for wg-security-response (and no one else) around LLM-authored code.~~ reverted this.

## LLM Usage Policy

For additional information about the policy itself, see [the appendix](#appendix).

### Overview

Using LLMs while working on `rust-lang/rust` is conditionally allowed, when done with care.
LLMs are not a substitute for thought,
and we do not allow them to be used in ways that risk losing our shared social and technical understanding of the project,
nor in ways that hurt our goals of creating a strong community.

The policy's guidelines are roughly as follows:

> It's fine to use LLMs to answer questions, analyze, distill, refine, check, suggest, review. But not to **create**.

> We carve out a space for "experimentation" to inform future revisions to this policy.

### Rules
#### Legend
- ✅ Allowed
- ❌ Banned
- ⚠️ Allowed with caveats. Must disclose that an LLM was used.
- ℹ️ Adds additional detail to the policy. These bullets are normative.

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.

> - Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue or PR.
```

This is a policy for `r-l/r`.  Speaking about RFCs may confuse the reader as to the scope of this policy.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

>     - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly on `rust-lang/rust`.
```

As written, this could read as a prohibition on posting the summary publicly *anywhere*.  That would be an overreach and is not what I think is meant.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: I think the clarification is fair, but I don't think that removing the point about personal use is fair. The point is to clarify that it's for personal use, and posting it publicly outside the project counts as that still.

Reviewer 26: This is a policy for r-l/r, so I'd consider it out of bounds for this to prohibit, e.g., a member of another team using an LLM to construct a summary and then posting that to a Project team space outside of r-l/r for team use.  It would stretch the meaning of *personal use* too far to consider that personal use.

Reviewer: What I meant is:

> This does not allow reposting the summary publicly on `rust-lang/rust`. This only includes your own personal use.

is fine, because posting it publicly *outside* of `rust-lang/rust` counts as personal use under this policy, and is therefore fine.

Author: I think this is covered by the new "scope" section.

- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
- Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM, as long as you don't try to merge them into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).

>     - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code when they're not entirely certain about those flaws.
```

Could we narrow this somehow?  I routinely run models over the lang nomination queue to prepare for meetings.  It's not the main purpose of my process, but nonetheless, the models reliably flag things that I would find anyway, e.g., violations of RFC 0344 lint naming conventions, setting the lint level and `report_in_deps` in a way inconsistent with our process, etc.

The model is going to have found this flaw in the unmerged code first, and I'm going to have seen that, so I'd read that as falling under this policy.  But I'm not looking forward to having to pollute all my comments, e.g.:

> ```diff
> declare_lint! {
> - UNUSED_FROBINATOR,
> + UNUSED_FROBINATORS,
> ```
>
> Please pluralize this name, according to RFC 0344.  *(An LLM was used in the discovery of this flaw.)*

Or could we come up with a scheme for blanket disclosure?  Could we disclose once somewhere, e.g., in [team](https://github.com/rust-lang/team), whether *all* our review comments should be treated as possibly LLM assisted?

I suppose I'd even be OK if triagebot wants to walk around in my shadow posting scarlet letters after each of my comments as long as I don't need to retype this everywhere.[^1]

[^1]: That is, I'm OK with this *for me*.  I have deeper concerns about how disclosure affects the Project.  See https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3236985179.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: I'm a bit confused why you're asking for this clarification since this is under the allowed section. You just don't need to disclose it, from what I can see.

Author: No, under the rules it currently requires disclosure.
> Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you [...] disclose that an LLM was used.

Reviewer: Ah, that feels a bit confusing, then. Because the way this list is worded, it looks like it is technically allowed, and probably should be moved down to the caveats section.

I don't think that we should be allowing blanket disclosure. Part of the reason why this policy exists is to avoid complacency, and this is a great way to ensure it.

Reviewer 26: > The model is going to have found this flaw in the unmerged code first, and I'm going to have seen that, so I'd read that as falling under this policy. But I'm not looking forward to having to pollute all my comments, e.g.:
> 
> > ```diff
> > declare_lint! {
> > - UNUSED_FROBINATOR,
> > + UNUSED_FROBINATORS,
> > ```
> >   
> > Please pluralize this name, according to RFC 0344.  _(An LLM was used in the discovery of this flaw.)_

Something I should mention here that's probably not immediately obvious to those outside of lang is that (as we do on the lang calls) I'm generally leaving these comments *during* a live lang meeting.  We might go through 25 items in 150 minutes.

That doesn't leave a lot of bandwidth (hence the lang-ops preparation for the calls).  That's the context in which I'm asking for a reliable low-cost way to comply with this while being able to leave the comments I need to leave.

Reviewer: I don't think that you need to “pollute” your comments here. I would say, if you're using an LLM to blanket go through all these items, you could easily satisfy this policy by:

1. Having a separate document where all of these details are listed
2. Directly link to the spot that mentions the relevant issue
3. At the top of the main document, make it clear that an LLM was used to generate it

Disclosure still counts if it requires clicking on a link.

>     - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
#### ✅ Allowed
- Any usage of an LLM where you are the only one that sees the output, e.g.
    - asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
    - asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC (but not reposting that summary)
    - asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
    - writing tools and code that you do not attempt to merge into `rust-lang/rust`.
- Using an LLM to discover bugs, as long as you personally verify the bug, write it up yourself, and disclose that an LLM was used.
  Please refer to [our guidelines for fuzzers](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/fuzzing.html#guidelines).
    - ℹ️ This also includes reviewers who use LLMs to discover flaws in unmerged code.
```

Reviewer 12: Is this equivalent?

Reviewer 26: The "where you are the only one that sees the output" clause would be a more expansive prohibition.  You could be working with someone else, with another team, or posting it publicly (but not to r-l/r).  Maybe something like:

> ...where the output is not posted to r-l/r in a way intended to be reviewed by compiler, types, libs, or rustdoc.

(See the recent additions for other items this framing is trying to encompass.)

Author: I like Niko's suggestion to make this more clear that these are examples of a larger policy point. I've added it.

Reviewer 12: @traviscross that makes sense, I did not intend the words quite that literally.

> 

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Using an LLM in the creation of experimental code changes that are not meant to be reviewed and will never be merged but must live as draft PRs on `rust-lang/rust` for tooling reasons, such as to run crater or perf.

```

I don't believe the policy means to prohibit this, and I believe it'd be better to say this explicitly.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: Nice catch, added.

Reviewer: I mean, considering how easily we could generate code to run via crater or perf, how expensive this is, and how sensitive it can be to minute changes, I would rather not allow any code to be run in those circumstances that wouldn't be valid to merge normally.

And to be clear, I mean *code* here. Most of the time, the issue is just that the code needs to be made more generic or documented, not that the code will be substantially different from the end result. If you need to rewrite the entire thing after a perf run, I would say it wasn't a useful perf run, and I only think that should happen due to misconceptions that were found by perf, not just inherently due to the authorship restriction.

Reviewer 14: Well it's not like a random user is able to invoke crater and perf, a trusted member must approve first.

PRs not intended for merging can legitimately used for running crater to gauge the effect of a change or gather statistics from the ecosystem, e.g. rust-lang/rust#129604, rust-lang/rust#137044, rust-lang/rust#154887. Also this suggested-change is not restricted to crater/perf either, e.g. one could use draft PRs for testing CI (rust-lang/rust#154969) or bot interactions (rust-lang/rust#155221). So having a "must be valid to merge normally" restriction makes no sense.

Reviewer 26: Yes.  My motivating use cases are edition testing and lang research, neither of which produce PRs that will ever be merged.

Reviewer 26: > Nice catch, added.[^1]

Thanks @jyn514.

[^1]: Note for posterity: this thread is displaying out of causal order.  Jyn's message appeared, at least for me, after the earlier messages in the thread.

> 

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Syncing code and documentation into `rust-lang/rust` (e.g., using submodules, subtrees, [josh](https://github.com/josh-project/josh), etc.) from other repositories that do not follow this policy.

```

It's my understanding this is meant to be allowed, but I don't otherwise see it.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: Added.

Reviewer: I would say that this is okay since the goal is explicitly not to extend this policy to those repositories, although I would hesitate to just make this a single footnote since there are a few nuances, like needing to resolve merge conflicts. Those specific changes required to merge the subtree should still follow this policy, even if the original repo does not.

Reviewer 26: > Added.

Thanks @jyn514.

> 

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Using an LLM to generate solutions to an issue, learning from them, and then writing a solution from scratch yourself and in your own style.

```

I'd suggest moving this one to the *allowed* category (and revising it to mention generating example *solutions* in the plural, as that's better guidance for what someone should really do).

This is more similar to the other *allowed* items than to the *with caveats* items.  As with using an LLM to review one's own code, this is a *private* use.  We're requiring that the person write the solution that others will see *from scratch*.  I.e., I read that as asking for independent creation — prohibiting copying in any form (in fact, it might be a good idea to make the language stronger about this, to improve clarity; maybe add "(no copying)" after "from scratch").

Nobody other than the author therefore will ever see these educational materials.  Months could pass between the author looking at these examples and writing a solution.  We don't demand to know the books or papers the author might have read that contained example code for similar problems.

Demanding disclosure here is a reach into a private space, and so is an overreach.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: I agree. I've moved this to the "Allowed" section.

Reviewer: This just feels like you failed to take in the rest of the policy and decided to remove a large part of it because you disagree with it. The entire policy effectively clarifies what it considers valid "rewording" of LLM output and what isn't, and so adding a tiny bullet point at the beginning that overrides that and says it's all allowed with no caveats just undermines all that.

Reviewer 26: There are no valid rewordings under this policy.  As the policy says:

> This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)". No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

It then fully bans all contributions that were "originally authored" by LLMs other than those by approved bots, those under the recently added experimental process, machine translation, and trivial code changes.  I.e., the other things under the *Allowed with caveats* section.

The odd one out is this one.  The others represent things "originally authored" by an LLM, as the policy defines it.  This one is not that.  The policy requires that a solution be rewritten from scratch — i.e., it cannot be "originally authored" by an LLM.

Reviewer: So, I guess I wasn't 100% correct on the reasoning here, but the effect is the same: you appear to be failing to take in the policy and deciding to remove a decent portion because you disagree with it.

The point here is that the policy is intentionally conservative when it comes to LLM usage: anything where the LLM could have potentially influenced the output in ways you didn't directly control is included. This is one of those obvious cases. It's like asking a friend to copy their homework; even if you just read a friend's paper and then rewrote your own, it's still fundamentally different than writing your own paper.

And similarly, examples like this exist in code too. For example, there have been multiple cases where code has been leaked and reverse engineers have explicitly refused to read it for legal reasons; simply knowing what was done taints the idea of a "clean-room" implementation. This is an obvious example of that. You can't say that this is "too private;" if we decide that LLMs are our business and you've decided to contribute, you should let us know, just like how you should let us know if you copy-paste code verbatim from another project. Your alternative is to not contribute code, not to hide its source.

Reviewer 26: > The point here is that the policy is intentionally conservative when it comes to LLM usage: anything where the LLM could have potentially influenced the output in ways you didn't directly control is included.

Included in what the policy allows, without disclosure, are:

- Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
- Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
- Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.

Any of these can influence your output — i.e., what you'll send to a reviewer.  The LLM can give you broken answers about the workings of the code base, can give you a backward description of what was discussed in the RFC, and in review, can push you away from correct answers and toward wrong ones.  I.e., the policy allows you to *learn* incorrect things from an LLM, without disclosure, that may result in you submitting a very confused PR.

The suggested text says:

> - Using an LLM to generate solutions to an issue, learning from them, and then writing a solution from scratch yourself and in your own style.

This, too, is simply an opportunity to *learn* something from the LLM.  You may learn good things, you may learn bad things.  That's up to you.  You still have to write your own solution.

Learning from things and writing one's own solution is not copying.  If it were, then there are many other kinds of learning we would need to prohibit (not just disclose) far more urgently.

Reviewer: The issue isn't that it's copying, though, or whether you learned. The issue is whether an LLM was involved at all. It's a specific case where many people underestimate the effect the tools have on the end result, and so, we ask for disclosure in general to avoid having to litigate the very specific circumstances of what happened to determine whether they need to disclose or not.

It feels like the main issue, which you're explicitly not pointing out, is that you're concerned that people would be judged based upon whether an LLM was involved at all, and therefore, LLM usage should be kept as a "dirty pleasure" in this particular instance. I don't think that it's worth diluting the policy or creating confusion just because people are specifically unwilling to admit they used a particular tool.

Reviewer 26: My concern here is that it's inconsistent and an overreach.  This would be more consistently placed with the *learning* rules rather than the *original creation* rules.  It's an overreach in the same way that it'd be an overreach to require disclosure for the other *learning* rules.

The concerns about disclosure eroding trust in the Project are separate, and I've articulated them [elsewhere](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3236985179).

Reviewer: You seem to be intentionally ignoring all of the arguments where LLMs are a very specific case that cannot be generalised. Sure, in a perfectly frictionless vacuum, we would not be asking for disclosure in this particular case. But for a number of different reasons, we're asking this.

Let me come up with an equally hypothetical and unrealistic scenario: imagine if, five years ago, a massive campaign had been undergoing to fill StackOverflow with subtly wrong information to sabotage developers in addition to all the correct information. It would be reasonable to ask all developers to disclose if they had used information on StackOverflow to develop a change in these very specific circumstances. This isn't "overreach," it's a pragmatic desire to correct for potential issues, and simply disclosing that something was involved is not a massive privacy concern.

Of course, I know exactly why people would be uncomfortable disclosing in this scenario, and it's because they don't want to be judged for making a potentially unethical decision by using these tools, although since that line of thought is banned from discussion in this RFC, I will both refrain from making it a part of my argument *and* insist that you refrain from making it a part of yours.

Simply put, I think that if people wish to not disclose because of its relation to (forbidden topic), then that is an argument that is not suitable for this policy. If you disagree, then you can take a look at my RFC, which explicitly reduces LLM usage even further because of the presence of that argument.

Reviewer 26: > I agree. I've moved this to the "Allowed" section.[^1]

Thanks @jyn514.

[^1]: Note for posterity: this thread is displaying out of causal order.  Jyn's message appeared, at least for me, after the earlier messages in the thread.

Author: @clarfonthey regardless of the policy issues: Please do not accuse TC of arguing in bad faith. It feels uncomfortably close to bullying them because you don't like their opinions.

Reviewer: I disagree that reasonable accusations constitute bullying, but I also did agree to stop commenting on these because I don't think it's particularly helpful.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.

>     - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.

Reviewer 26: Most of the work lang members do, as a team, is reviewing language proposals made to us in `rust-lang/rust` issue bodies, PR descriptions, and comments.  Here's a random recent one, by way of example:

- https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/155390

We tend to care about policies for how lang-related issue and PR descriptions are put forward, e.g., the [stabilization report template](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/pull/2219).  Though we are not ourselves large contributors of code to r-l/r, we are in the set of *maintainers* of r-l/r — at least, that's how I see it.

So it surprised me a bit, given that this document sets policy for what's allowed for people making lang proposals to us in r-l/r (e.g., by prohibiting LLM-assisted drafting), that we weren't included on this FCP, though it had been earlier discussed.

I don't know what to do about that.  I don't really want to ask here for the hassle of the FCP being restarted.  And yet, given what the policy covers, it seems awkward to me that we're not on it — as though I'm commenting here with needs and interests as an outsider.  That's how it feels, anyway.

Is there anything we can do about this?  Maybe the scope can be narrowed so that it doesn't set policy for lang proposals or documentation items lang owns?  Maybe something else?  I don't know.  @jyn514, what do you think?[^1]

[^1]: If you don't mind, I really do want to hear specifically from @jyn514 on this (no hurry).

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: I'm happy to narrow the scope so this excludes lang proposals and stabilization reports, so that t-lang can set their own policy. Are there other things in t-lang's purview you would like to see excluded?

Reviewer 26: Here are the things that concern me (as a member of lang, lang-ops, lang-docs, style, and edition):

- `src/doc/book/` — Handled by the subprojects rule for now; should continue to be excluded even if we later fully merge it into `rust-lang/rust`.
- `src/doc/reference/` — Handled by the subprojects rule for now; should continue to be excluded even if we later fully merge it into `rust-lang/rust`.
- `src/doc/rust-by-example/` — Handled by the subprojects rule for now; should continue to be excluded even if we later fully merge it into `rust-lang/rust`.
- `src/doc/edition-guide/` — Handled by the subprojects rule for now; should continue to be excluded even if we later fully merge it into `rust-lang/rust`.
- `src/doc/nomicon/` — Handled by the subprojects rule for now; should continue to be excluded even if we later fully merge it into `rust-lang/rust`.
- `src/doc/style-guide/` — This is maintained directly in `rust-lang/rust`.  Issues and PRs about this shouldn't be covered without an FCP from style (or lang, acting as its parent team).
- `library/std/src/keyword_docs.rs` — This is a lang / lang-docs matter.
- `library/core/src/primitive_docs.rs` — This is a lang / lang-docs matter.
- Attribute documentation (see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/142472) — This is a lang / lang-docs matter.
- `src/doc/unstable-book/src/language-features/` — This is a lang / lang-docs matter.
- Lang- and edition-owned documentation in `src/doc/rustc-dev-guide` such as the stabilization report template.
- `//@ reference: <rule-id>` annotations in `tests/` (and similar FLS annotations) — This is a lang-docs / FLS matter and LLM-assistance for adding and maintaining these is likely.
- Compiler diagnostics: lint names — Lint naming is owned by lang.  I use LLMs to find good lint names.  These would have been "originally created" by an LLM as defined by this policy.
- Compiler diagnostics: messages — Often compiler diagnostic messages directly use language from the Reference, from RFCs, etc.  A compiler contributor should be able to use this approved language even if it was "originally created" by an LLM.  (This one is a bit different from the rest; it's about our use of LLMs on other teams not creating compliance hazards for compiler contributors.)
- Language design and edition proposals filed as `rust-lang/rust` issues and PRs (including stabilization reports) and the lang- and edition-relevant comments on those or about the language and edition consequences of other issues and PRs.
- Tracking issues for lang RFCs and lang experiments — these are largely lang-ops / lang matters.
- Edition tracking issues and edition tracking activity in `rust-lang/rust` — these are edition team matters.
- Project goal tracking activity in `rust-lang/rust` — these are program management matters generally, and lang, lang-ops, lang-docs, and edition matters as relevant to lang, lang-docs, and edition project goals.
- Things that I missed similar to those above and future uses of `rust-lang/rust` by the teams that concern me not on this FCP that are similar to those uses above.

Perhaps this could be addressed broadly by adding a *scope* section.  E.g.:

> ### Scope
>
> This policy applies to work within the purview of compiler, libs, types, rustdoc, bootstrap, and the subteams of each.  It does not apply to work within the purview of other teams that use `rust-lang/rust` such as lang, edition, and the subteams of each.  Those teams remain free to set their own policies.

What do you think?[^1]

[^1]: Again, I'm specifically interested in hearing only from @jyn514 here at this point.

Author: I like the idea of a scope section. I've added one and lightly edited other portions that used to involve the scope.

Reviewer 26: Thanks @jyn514.

    - ℹ️ This does not apply if the LLM content is clearly quoted and marked, you can post that.
         However, the content of the comment must stand on its own even without the LLM content; it's not a substitute for your own words.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.

> - Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Documentation that is originally generated by an LLM.
```

Without changing the semantics, could we search and replace all uses of "authored by an LLM" with "generated by an LLM"?  As @xtqqczze has pointed out [elsewhere](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3950#discussion_r3103640086):

> Authorship is something that applies to a person, not tools; a LLM can generate text, but it isn’t an author.

Pulling the idea of authorship into this policy seems unnecessarily philosophical for what it's trying to accomplish.  The technology is called "generative AI".  It'd seem more clear, to me, to stick with "generated".

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: jyn specifically clarified authorship as a term here to be specific, so, you can't just change one section and be consistent. It would require at least structural changes to the policy.

Reviewer 26: As best I can tell from a careful review, it requires a search-and-replace and then some minor redrafting of the *The meaning of "originally authored"* section.  That section could be redrafted, e.g., as:

> This document uses phrases such as "generated by an LLM" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)". No amount of editing can change how the text was originally created; how it was generated originally sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

(Of course, there are many ways to redraft it.  This is just one way.)

Reviewer: Right, I think it would be fair to change "originally authored" to "originally generated," just, it would have to be a structural change affecting multiple places and not just the one line. For what it's worth, I think that the distinction is pedantic, but will defer to jyn on what the better wording is. I assume that "authored" was chosen intentionally.

Author: I've changed this to "created" for consistency with the quote at the very top. I don't want to say "generated" because that invites questions about "how much" and "what percent" that aren't in the spirit of the policy.

    - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.
    - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics.
         LLMs are conditionally allowed to assist with the *logic* surrounding a diagnostic (see "code changes" under ⚠️ below),
         but they must not be used to author the message itself.
- Treating an LLM review as a sufficient condition to merge or reject a change.

>   LLM reviews, if enabled by a team, **must** be advisory-only.

Reviewer 12: It's not clear to me what this "team" language refers to here, as this is the rust-lang/rust policy

In general, new contributors will be scrutinized more heavily than existing contributors,
since they haven't yet established trust with their reviewers.

- Using an LLM to generate a solution to an issue, learning from its solution, and then rewriting it from scratch in your own style.
- Using machine-translation (e.g. Google Translate) from your native language without posting your original message.
  Doing so can introduce new miscommunications that weren't there originally, and prevents someone who speaks the language from providing a better translation.
    - ℹ️ Posting both your original message and the translated version is always ok, but you must still disclose that machine-translation was used.
- "Trivial" code changes that do not meet the [threshold of originality](https://fsfe.org/news/2025/news-20250515-01.en.html).
    - ℹ️ Be cautious about PRs that consist solely of trivial changes.
      See also [the compiler team's typo fix policy](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/contributing.html#writing-documentation:~:text=Please%20notice%20that%20we%20don%E2%80%99t%20accept%20typography%2Fspellcheck%20fixes%20to%20internal%20documentation).

> - Solicited, non-critical, high-quality, well-tested, and well-reviewed code changes that are originally authored by an LLM.

Reviewer 13: Can talk more about this elsewhere but this doesn't resolve the concern for me. Thoughts:

- I would try to be a bit stronger with "solicited" - using the word "discouraged from using an LLM unless they first talk with a reviewer" kind of weakens general point. In my mind, someone coming and making a PR that has LLM-generated code in it, without having first talked to a reviewer, is grounds for an instant-reject. Along these lines, I want to be clear that it's not just *any* reviewer that can say "yes you can make a PR with LLM-generated code" but that they have to do the review.

- It is not okay to have to ping an entire team to merge any LLM-generated code. This falls under "well-reviewed" and "high-quality" to me: if the reviewer is not confident in the changes, they shouldn't be merging it. We trust our reviewers, and this is not trust.

- I don't completely agree with the examples of "changes that occasionally affect soundness", and I also am not sure I like the word "discourage". Ultimately, I think the two prior lines cover enough. If anything, you could say something like "Changes that can be tricky if done improperly should undergo additional scrutiny by both the reviewer and author"

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: I've removed the bullet about team pings and added a new "Experiment" section. We've discussed drafts of it already, but I'll wait to resolve this thread until you have a chance to read the final version :)

  1. "Solicited" means that a reviewer has communicated *ahead of time* that they are willing to review an LLM-authored PR.
      - ℹ️ New contributors are discouraged from using an LLM unless they first talk with a reviewer.
      - ℹ️ As an additional check, the team that owns the code must be pinged on (but does not need to complete an MCP for) LLM-authored PRs,
           and the reviewer must allow 48 hours to elapse after the ping before merging the PR.

>            Teams can choose to remove this requirement for code they own by completing an FCP.

Reviewer 26: Question: I've noticed that people are often troubled by noisy pings of large teams like compiler.  Given that one of the motivations of this policy is to reduce the noise level, I wonder how this system would work out in practice.

Would people be OK with this?

I worry about this mechanism creating hostility toward these PRs just due to the noise that these pings would create.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: Do we expect a lot of these to occur?

many others feel that its negative impact on society and the climate are severe enough that no use is acceptable.
Still others are working out their opinion.

Despite these differences, there are many common goals we all share:

- Building a community of deep experts in our collective projects.
- Building an inclusive community where all feel welcome and respected.

To achieve those goals, this policy is designed with the following points in mind:

- Many people find LLM-generated code and writing deeply unpleasant to read or review.
- Many people find LLMs to be a significant aid to learning and discovery.
- LLMs are a new technology, and we are still learning how to use, moderate, and improve them.
  Since we're still learning, we have chosen an intentionally conservative policy that lets us maintain the standard of quality that Rust is known for;
  but leave space open to experiment with LLMs to inform future policies.

### Moderation policy
#### It's not your job to play detective
["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).
Don't try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.

> If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy; if it's borderline, report it to the mods and move on.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
Point to this policy, maybe report it to the mods (at your discretion), and move on.
```

To an outside reader, reporting something to the mods is going to sound like an escalation against the contributor.  Given that, it reads a bit backward that the *clear* violations should only result in the policy being cited while the *borderline* violations require a report to the mods.

There are many ways this could be redrafted to avoid this.  What I'd suggest is leaving whether to report this to the mods to the discretion of the reviewer in all cases and removing the conditional on whether the case is borderline or clear.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: The mods have openly encouraged people to report *non-violations* so they can keep an eye on things. I don't think that we should be reinforcing the stereotype that communication with the mods is inherently accusatory; we should be breaking that assumption instead.

Author: I've clarified that reporting to mods is not intended to be a penalty.

#### Be honest

> Conversely, lying about whether or how you've used an LLM is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
Conversely, claiming to have not used an LLM when you did or stating your use of an LLM as less than it was is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.
```

I think to be fair to people, this language needs to have a safe harbor.  People shouldn't have to worry that they have *precisely* calibrated their disclosures, i.e., not too high, not too low.

They might have done the work many months ago and may not remember the exact details.  It must always be safe to *over*-disclose — to err on the side of stating that more LLM use happened.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer 14: the suggested edit is much harder to understand than the original text though

Reviewer: I actually disagree; I would say that lying is a larger burden to meet and would not include people who are mistaken. Instead of weakening the wording, we could maybe clarify that the mods understand the difference between an lie and a misunderstanding.

Reviewer 26: > the suggested edit is much harder to understand than the original text though

There are many ways to redraft, and I'm OK with one that continues to frame it as lying.  E.g.:

```suggestion
Conversely, lying about not using an LLM when you did, or lying about relying less on an LLM than you did is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.
```

Reviewer: I mean, I already kind of solved this in my version:

> If a user is found to be repeatedly lying about LLM usage (using LLMs in a non-trivial way without disclosing that usage)

It doesn't need to be particularly elegant; parentheses are fine.

If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to the [moderation team](mailto:rust-mods@rust-lang.org).
Don't try to hide it.

#### Penalties
The policies marked with a 🔨 follow the same guidelines as the code of conduct:
Violations will first result in a warning, and repeated violations may result in a ban.
- 🔨 Violations of the "Be honest" section

Other violations are left up to the discretion of reviewers and moderators.
For most first-time violations we recommend closing and locking the PR or issue.

> Using an LLM does **not** mean it's ok to harrass a contributor.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
That a person used an LLM does **not** mean it's OK to harass that contributor.
```

I *think* what this means to say is that it's not OK to harass people who used an LLM.  It reads to me, though, as saying that using an LLM doesn't excuse the user harassing people, which is also obviously true, though probably too obvious to mention.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: This just feels pedantic, honestly. The new version feels a bit clunky to read, and the original still is understandable imho.

Reviewer 12: I agree with TC that it is quite ambiguous. I would read the original as [a reference to Jubilee's comments](https://rust-lang.github.io/perspectives-on-llms/all-comments.html#jubilee-young), "This is not particularly unique. LLM-driven issues and pull requests are often backed by defensiveness around how they got their information, whether it is code or an error report".

Reviewer 29: "it's not ok to harass a contributor for using an llm"? [edit: i may have been mistakenly looking at an old version]

All contributors must be treated with respect.
The code-of-conduct applies to *all* conversations in the Rust project.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally authored by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

### The meaning of "originally authored"

This document uses the phrase "originally authored" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".
No amount of editing can change authorship; authorship sets the initial style and it is very hard to change once it's set.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

### Non-exhaustive policy

This policy does not aim to be exhaustive.
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Usages that do not use LLMs for creation and do not show LLM output to another human are likely allowed ✅ 

> - Usages that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- Uses that do not use LLMs for creation and do not show LLM output to another human are likely allowed ✅ 
- Uses that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌
```

The more correct word here is *uses*.  The word *usage* means a customary pattern or habit of use (or a rate or quantity of use).

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

> - Usages that use LLMs for creation or show LLM output to another human are likely banned ❌

Reviewer 26: The policy has evolved since this section was written, and I wonder whether it needs to be redrafted in a softer way.  It now reads as far starker than the rest of the policy does.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

### Conditions for modification or dissolution
This policy is not set in stone, and we can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Minor changes, such as typo fixes, only require a normal PR approval.
Major changes, such as adding a new rule or cancelling an existing rule, require

> a simple majority of members of teams using rust-lang/rust (without concerns).

Reviewer 26: I read "without concerns" ambiguously here.  Does it mean "it must achieve a simple majority of the members of teams using r-l/r *and* no concerns must be filed" or that "it must achieve a simple majority of the members of teams using r-l/r *without* considering concerns to have effect for blocking it."

Either one I could see as having been intended.  The first is more similar to how we normally treat concerns, but it's in conflict with wanting only a simple majority, as it actually requires a kind unanimity — any one person can block it.  The second would be closer in spirit to a simple majority system, but it's in tension with our usual system of concerns.

Which reading is intended?  Probably this should be made more clear.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Author: I meant the first. I've clarified the wording.

This policy can be dissolved in a few ways:

- An accepted FCP by teams using rust-lang/rust.

> - An objective concern raised about active harm the policy is having on the reputation of Rust, with evidence, as decided by a leadership council FCP.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- An objective concern raised about active harm the policy is having on the reputation of Rust, with evidence, as decided by a leadership council FCP.
- By the leadership council adopting, by FCP, a Project-wide policy and stating in an FCP that it displaces this policy.
```

In my view, the LC (at any later time) would be within its rights to decide that `rust-lang/rust` is a shared space and that the drawbacks exceed the benefits, to the Project, of r-l/r having a policy different from that of the Project overall.  The LC should be able to do this without having to make an evidentiary finding that the policy is harming the reputation of Rust.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..cd9aecdc256bb1392f42e40648e78e70686af40b)*

Reviewer: First, this would be redundant for the first point, since if the LC can just decide whenever to dissolve the policy, then it doesn't matter if they have concerns about active harm.

Second, if you just think the LC can veto any change to how a repository is managed after the teams managing that repo have signed off, without an RFC, I find that at least a little bit concerning.

Third, this is supposed to be a temporary policy, to be replaced by a project-wide policy. (Note that if a project-wide policy sets aside the option for this policy to be tailored by a few specific teams, I would consider that replacing this policy, even if this effectively stays as-is.)

So, from the perspective of this being refined by a larger RFC, I think that it's fair to say that it should only be replaced if there is active and demonstrable harm, not just because the LC doesn't like it. And uh, it's a *massive* conflict of interest for you to be proposing that to begin with, since you would be one of the people potentially making that decision.

Reviewer 26: > Third, this is supposed to be a temporary policy, to be replaced by a project-wide policy.

The author has rejected framing this as an interim policy, so I'm not sure this is correct.  See https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3104792407.

Reviewer: I can't comment for what jyn thinks, but to me, the goal here is to not belittle a policy that has already been put in place even if we also agree that policy needs to be put in place elsewhere in the project. The idea isn't that the policy itself is temporary, but rather than the only potential next step would be either:

a) The policy has shortcomings that need to be addressed, or
b) The policy is superceded by a broader one

Neither of these cases are "the LC doesn't like the policy and wants to remove it entirely"

Author: > In my view, the LC (at any later time) would be within its rights to decide that rust-lang/rust is a shared space and that the drawbacks exceed the benefits, to the Project, of r-l/r having a policy different from that of the Project overall.

The leadership council is an executive committee, not a board of directors. [As discussed previously](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#issuecomment-4443847295), they do not have authority to override teams. To the extent they are allowed to speak for teams, it's only when time is so urgent that it's not possible to use our normal decision-making mechanisms.

- Using an LLM to generate possible solutions to an issue, learning from them, and then writing something from scratch in your own style.
- Syncing code and documentation into `rust-lang/rust` (e.g., using submodules, subtrees, [josh](https://github.com/josh-project/josh), etc.) from other repositories that do not follow this policy.
- Using an LLM in the creation of experimental code changes that are not meant to be reviewed and will never be merged but must live as draft PRs on `rust-lang/rust` for tooling reasons, such as to run crater or perf.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This also applies to issue bodies and PR descriptions.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply if the LLM content is clearly quoted and marked, you can post that.
         However, the content of the comment must stand on its own even without the LLM content; it's not a substitute for your own words.
    - ℹ️ See also "machine-translation" in ⚠️ below.
- Documentation that is originally authored by an LLM.

>     - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.

Reviewer 30: Based on experience in using LLMs with Rust, I think this should be expanded to ban LLM-generated `// SAFETY: ` comments of any length. Even a trivial `// SAFETY: self.some_field is always >= 5` ought to be human-authored.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..9efffad99114e1ef5c5ef057d09d71f61808a9db)*

Author: Great point, done.

    - ℹ️ Review bot accounts must be blockable by individual users via the standard GitHub user-blocking mechanism. (Note that some GitHub "app" accounts post comments that look like users but cannot be blocked.)
    - ℹ️ If a more reliable tool, such as a linter or formatter, already exists for the language you're writing, we strongly suggest using that tool instead of or in addition to the LLM.
    - ℹ️ Configure LLM review tools to reduce false positives and excessive focus on trivialities, as these are common, exhausting failure modes.
    - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed. It's ok to require a *response* to each comment but the response can be "the bot's wrong here".
        - In other words, reviewers must explicitly endorse an LLM comment before blocking a PR. They are responsible for their own analysis of the LLM's comment and cannot treat it as a CI failure.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to private use of an LLM for reviews; see ✅ above.

All of these **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

> #### Experiment: LLM-authored code changes

Reviewer 31: I feel like the ethical issues with it are too big to allow something like this. A change being high-quality doesn't fix all of the massive ethical issues with generative models.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..196cf632749e752d276325c9778ab0ba54a5935e)*

Author: I agree it doesn't fix the issues. I don't think we can build a policy on top of the ethical issues, though. I'd like to share (with permission) this comment from @davidtwco on internal channels:

> I share some of yours and others' ethical concerns and disagree on some, and I think everyone is entitled to have their views on the ethics of AI/LLMs/the surrounding industry and we should respect those, but I nevertheless don't think the ethical concerns are a solid basis for project policy.

> Fundamentally we're never going to get everyone to agree on the ethical concerns - where each of us land on these issues is going to depend on individual values, personal experiences, the cultures we come from, etc. The project is hundreds of people with as many varied backgrounds, we've almost certainly already got variety in opinion on any ethical and political question you can think of. As soon as we start to consider ethical concerns, all sorts of impossible questions come up that force us to prioritise the values of some project members over others - I don't think that will ever work.

> As much as possible, we should let people make individual choices that align with their values, that's important - you shouldn't be forced to use AI if you don't want to. But as members of a large project, we need to be okay with being in a project with people who disagree with us on things we feel strongly about (that ship has already sailed), whatever we might think about those positions privately, the important thing is that we all treat each other with dignity and respect in our interactions in the project.

> Instead of using ethical concerns as a basis for policy, we should justify policy on the basis of how something is impacting our ability as a project to deliver a really great programming language.

Author: In a later comment he also said this:
> I generally disagree with the notion that the policies of the Rust Project are particularly influential in setting a benchmark for open source projects or the industry more broadly. Lots of projects have pro-AI policies and lots of them have anti-AI policies, and while they cite each other, I don't get the sense that many projects were fundamentally swayed in their position by what some other project did, or that if we say that we're not going to allow AI contributions, that we'll have much of an impact on the trajectory of LLMs and software engineering. It would be nice if we did have that much sway, but I just don't think we do. There is one place that I think the Rust Project does have a really considerable impact - and that's in what we build. Rust is having an significant impact already and has enormous potential to do more over the coming decades. Everything that we're building here can and will have a tremendous impact on the safety of software worldwide - that's incredibly important. My earlier stance is motivated by the conviction that a Rust Project which is open to different perspectives is a Rust Project that will maximise Rust's impact on the world.

and I'll add to that — I agree with David that I don't think we can affect *whether* projects adopt LLMs, but I do think we can affect *how* they do so, to influence those policies to be more thoughtful and less destructive to their own projects and communities.

Reviewer 32: I'm very sorry,

> Instead of using ethical concerns as a basis for policy, we should justify policy on the basis of how something is impacting our ability as a project to deliver a really great programming language.

This is unbelievably irresponsible and a explicit avdocacy of abandonment of any sort of ethical considerations in software development, which I *very much* did not expect to find here and makes me *deeply uncomfortable*.

Reviewer 33: I am new to Rust, and not a member of the project, but reading the above compels me to speak.

Seeing in the above quotation that a member of the Rust project is arguing, seriously, that a policy should not be based in ethics is extremely concerning.

Like I said, I'm still new to Rust and only starting to learn and use it. However, I've followed Rust with sentimental interest for years and had hoped one day to contribute to the language in some way. The above quotation, and this broader context, has me strongly reconsidering that.

Reviewer 34: @jyn514 I notice from your profile that you use they/them pronouns. I'm sure you're aware the right of trans, non-binary, intersex and gender-nonconforming people to exist is a hotly contested political issue in many countries, with a certain british billionaire spending inordinate amounts of money lobbying to take rights from trans folks, and many many states in the US passing legislation to persecute trans people. and yet, the code of conduct states that:

> We are committed to providing a friendly, safe and welcoming environment for all, regardless of [...] gender identity and expression, sexual orientation

I opine that, as well as being a political issue, standing against bigotry and discrimination is also a moral/ethical one.

in sharing your colleague's comment and not disagreeing with it, I assume you are also claiming that ethics (and politics?) are not "a solid basis for project policy."

the code of conduct is already based in ethics and politics, and I can only assume that you'd prefer it remain that way.

in parting, I leave you a warning: if you as a community continue to insist that ethics and/or politics do not have a place, you will hemorrhage all the good people in the community and end up a [nazi bar](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Nazi_bar). I have watched it happen, and it can and will happen to you if you don't prevent it.

Author: Of course I'm aware. There's a reason I no longer live in the USA. Of course I agree that standing against bigotry and discrimination is a moral position.

The problem is that a moderation policy is fundamentally different from a technical policy. If we say that using LLMs is immoral, unacceptable, not allowed, then we're not only saying you can't use them, we're saying *we will ban you if you do*. As a project, we have consensus that that's the right thing to do for transphobes and homophobes. As a project, we do *not* have consensus that that's the right thing to do for people using AI. This is something you can't change by arguing with me; you'd have to convince the whole project, and you simply won't be able to do that. Believe me, we've tried. We have the same problem for people working at companies and on projects that others in the project find unethical: many people hate it, but that's not the same as being able to treat it as a Code of Conduct violation.

If you accept that, then you now have the option of saying that we'll build a technical policy based on ethics. *This* is what David is saying is unworkable: everyone will have a different set of ethics, and some people will refuse to abide by the rules, regardless of what the rules are, because they believe the rules are morally wrong. At that point this reverts to being a moderation policy again and we haven't gained anything.

Given that, we have no choice but to build a policy built on technical concerns. We can be mad about it — I am! Clar Fon is! We can try to limit the use of LLMs as much as we can within those bounds. But that's different from limiting LLM usage on moral grounds.

Reviewer 35: > Instead of using ethical concerns as a basis for policy, we should justify policy on the basis of how something is impacting our ability as a project to deliver a really great programming language.

Do you know what makes a great community project right? Ethics, a well structured set of ethics that prevent the project from rotting and being taken by bad actors, or, well, in this specific case, the technology that threats to eventually destroy every single open source project. (and so many other things).

LITERALLY policy should be based on ethics. That sentence is a bad omen.

Reviewer 16: Chiming is as rep of the moderation team: please stop rehearsing this argument.

Instead try to understand all the efforts we are doing to navigate this dilemma. If you think it's a boolean matter (yes/no), then you probably didn't have a chance to follow the evolution of our internal discussions (*plural*).

Which is understandable when coming from outside of our project. But we are not keen to tolerate entitlement and judgemental comments without having a proper context.

The policy's guidelines are roughly as follows:

> It's fine to use LLMs to answer questions, analyze, distill, refine, check, suggest, review. But not to **create**.

> LLMs work best when used as a tool to write *better*, not *faster*.

> We carve out a space for "experimentation" to inform future revisions to this policy.

### Rules
#### Legend
- ✅ Allowed
- ❌ Banned
- ⚠️ Allowed with caveats. Must disclose that an LLM was used.
- ℹ️ Adds additional detail to the policy. These bullets are normative.

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Any use of an LLM where you are the only one who sees the output. For example:
  - Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
  - Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue or PR.
      - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
  - Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
      - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
  - Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM.
  - Using an LLM to generate possible solutions to an issue, learning from them, and then writing something from scratch in your own style.

> - Using an LLM in the creation of experimental code changes that are not meant to be reviewed and will never be merged but must live as draft PRs on `rust-lang/rust` for tooling reasons, such as to run crater or perf.

Reviewer 8: This needs to be moved to "⚠️ Allowed with caveats", because it needs to disclose that an LLM was used. Sometimes, people take draft PRs and use them as a basis for some other work, or revive them if the original author has abandoned them. Without disclosure, that would amount to unknowingly working from LLM output.

(I agree with the premise that something amounting to "I just want to run perf on this" is...not *okay*, exactly, but reasonable for us to accept as a compromise. My only concern here is requiring disclosure.)

@rfcbot concern require-disclosure-even-for-draft-prs

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 26: I consider this as beyond the scope of the teams that are FCPing this.  These teams do not exclusively *own* the `rust-lang/rust` Project monorepo.  They own certain code within the repository and certain activities that take place within the space, e.g., compiler reviews.  Something that goes up in `rust-lang/rust`, for tooling reasons, that does not ask for compiler (or libs, etc.) review and that is not intended to be merged is outside of this scope.  That would be a Project matter.

Concern about what someone else might later do is valid (though rather unlikely for the use cases I have in mind), but that applies equally to what someone else might later do with code posted anywhere[^1] — this policy creates compliance challenges when building on other people's code.

[^1]: The obvious retort is, "yes, but it's more likely if it's in `rust-lang/rust`".  Agreed.  I'd consider that a good argument to make on a Project-level policy.

(In fact, I'd suggest it's worth spending some words in the policy discussing this and what we expect people to do.  E.g., if we expect people to proactively verify that any code they're building on (e.g., from someone else's fork) is free of LLM generation before they submit the combined result for review, then probably we'd do well to say that.)

Reviewer 26: Perhaps the compromise here is to separate these out by intention (and that was the goal behind the various qualifiers in this item — it's not speaking generally about draft PRs).  If you're putting up a draft PR that you do intend to later make a not-draft PR and ask for compiler (or libs, etc.) review, then maybe it'd be better to shift the compliance to the earliest feasible point.  Such PRs are distinct due to this intention.

Of course, there still may be practical problems with adding requirements on draft PRs.  Often people put these up without any PR description at all.  It's perhaps in tension with the idea that a draft PR is "not yet ready for review" to suggest that people could have already violated our policy at that point by the PR description being incomplete — maybe it was in draft because the author wanted to read this policy first and work out wording for a compliant disclosure.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, maybe "suggested" disclosure for them? Empty PR descriptions in drafts is a very real thing, but it would be nice to have disclosure by default for them.

Reviewer 8: Whether it is "intended" to be merged is beside the point. If a PR is posted to rust-lang/rust, draft or no, people may reasonably consider building upon it. It is not an unreasonable ask to say that LLM usage needs to be disclosed, in order to give a prospective user of that code the information they'd need in order to do so.

Otherwise, a subsequent developer is in the position of potentially submitting a *non-draft* PR containing that LLM-written code, which would be against the policy. It would be a downgrade from existing practice if they first have to go "did you use an LLM for this?"; part of the point of having this policy is to not have to do that.

Author: i think it’s reasonable if they have to ask the original author whether they used an LLM. it’s not *so* different from due diligence to make sure that the license from another piece of code is compatible, and i don’t think it will generate mistrust in the same way as investigating every incoming PR. it also generalizes nicely if people want to submit code from other projects, like a patch from crossbeam_channel to mpsc.

if the author is unresponsive or we otherwise can’t determine whether it’s LLM authored, we’d assume it is and it would have the same 5 rules as other LLM PRs.

Reviewer 13: (to the concern) Strong disagree on this point. Disclosure has both advantages and disadvantages. Requiring disclosure for things that (at least initially) are not meant for review is not in the spirit of why we want to do so.

Reviewer 8: > it’s not _so_ different from due diligence to make sure that the license from another piece of code is compatible

We don't, today, expect that someone would submit a draft PR containing code that was (for instance) misappropriated from some other project in violation of that project's license. We don't ask "does this draft consist entirely of code we're legally allowed to use". We just tend to assume that if someone submitted it as a draft PR, they didn't do such a thing. And I think that's entirely reasonable to be able to assume.

I'm proposing that we should be able to do the same for LLMs.

To be explicit here, I'm not suggesting that such PRs be disallowed or restricted. I'm observing that it's not an unreasonable ask for a draft perf-test PR to say, for instance, "LLM prototype to perf test an idea".

Author: I wonder if we're confusing two things. There's *draft* PRs, which use the github draft mechanism, and are intended to eventually be turned into a full PR. And then there's *experimental* PRs, which are marked with `S-experimental` and basically never merge.

@lolbinarycat points out that people who never use an LLM will assume that they don't have to read the policy. If we don't require disclosure on draft PRs, they'll have a requirement to ask the author about LLMs, but they may not even know they have that obligation. For that reason I think we should require disclosure on draft PRs.

I don't think we should require disclosure on experimental PRs.

Reviewer 23: It is true that there's an edge case where someone writes a draft PR with AI assistance, and then someone else unknowingly builds on top of it. But I do not think the existence of this "loophole" is, on its own, a particularly strong argument for requiring disclosure for draft PRs.

The policy already quotes "the optimal amount of fraud is not zero" as a guiding principle, and this seems quite similar to me. Just because there is a small loophole where something *could* slip through *by accident* does not mean you *have* to add more policy to prevent that. Doing so comes with a cost, and to me, the benefit seems miniscule.

Author: > It is true that there's an edge case where someone writes a draft PR with AI assistance, and then someone else unknowingly builds on top of it. But I do not think the existence of this "loophole" is, on its own, a particularly strong argument for requiring disclosure for draft PRs.

I actually don't see this as the primary motivation. I agree that if it were that alone we should just file it under "the optimal amount of fraud is not zero" and be done.

My main concern is for reviewers who "proactively" review new PRs, even without first being assigned (I believe @jieyouxu often does this). I like this model, I think it's a good model! Even if they aren't able to approve the PR, they're often able to give feedback that decreases the review burden for people who have r+ rights.

But if there's no disclosure on the PR that an LLM is involved, nor any indication that the PR shouldn't be reviewed yet, then they'd end up reviewing the PR without knowing, which brings us back to the original problem of mistrust. I don't see the GitHub "draft status" as sufficient because people often use it as "don't merge this yet" rather than "don't review this yet".

Reviewer 7: (Speaking for myself only: I only really look at draft or experimental PRs that I might be interested in, or if I got pinged. Or when they become non-draft that gets assigned to me / when I steal/co-assign a review. However, I would still appreciate if a draft / exp PR contain a disclosure so I can have more info upfront to decide if I want to look further or not.)

    - ℹ️ See also "Scope" in the appendix below.
- Documentation that is originally created by an LLM.
    - ℹ️ This includes non-trivial source comments, such as doc-comments, safety comments, or multiple paragraphs of non-doc-comments.
    - ℹ️ This includes compiler diagnostics.
         LLMs are conditionally allowed to assist with the *logic* surrounding a diagnostic (see "code changes" under ⚠️ below),
         but they must not be used to create the message itself.
- Treating an LLM review as a sufficient condition to merge or reject a change.
  LLM reviews, if enabled, **must** be advisory-only.
  Teams can have a policy that code can be merged without review, and they can have a policy that code must be reviewed by at least one person,
  but they may not have a policy that an LLM review substitutes for a human review.
    - ℹ️ See "review bots" in ⚠️ below.
    - ℹ️ An LLM review does not substitute for self-review. Authors are expected to review their own code before posting and after each change.

#### ⚠️ Allowed with caveats
The following are decided on a case-by-case basis.
In general, new contributors will be scrutinized more heavily than existing contributors,

> since they haven't yet established trust with their reviewers.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In general, new contributors will be scrutinized more heavily than existing contributors,
since they haven't yet established trust with their reviewers.
All contributors are subject to the same uniform policy; this is merely an observation that evaluations based on this policy incorporate an element of trust.
```

I think it's important to make it clear that this isn't a *different set of rules* for established project members.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If you are a new contributor, you should expect to be scrutinized more heavily than existing contributors,
since you haven't yet established trust with yourr reviewers.
```

Reviewer 8: @alice-i-cecile :+1: for that change as well (with s/yourr/your/), which makes this come across even more diplomatically. I don't think it removes the need to also add the note I added above, but I think it's a great improvement.

- Using machine-translation (e.g. Google Translate) from your native language without posting your original message.
  Doing so can introduce new miscommunications that weren't there originally, and prevents someone who speaks the language from providing a better translation.
    - ℹ️ Posting both your original message and the translated version is always ok, but you must still disclose that machine-translation was used.

> - "Trivial" code changes that do not meet the [threshold of originality](https://fsfe.org/news/2025/news-20250515-01.en.html).

Reviewer 15: I do not think "threshold of originality" is the right concept here. That standard concerns whether a work reflects the author’s own free and creative choices, which cannot meaningfully apply to LLM output. If the intent is to exclude mechanically trivial changes, the policy should describe that directly instead of relying on copyright terminology.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer: I disagree that this is the case, since I've pretty much always interpreted "threshold of originality" to additionally mean that something is unique and substantial enough to be copyrightable.

But would be interested if you have any particular examples of it being used in this context, since if this is a particularly decided matter and that's just not clear, it would be helpful to know.

Side note: I thought that the Foundation's policy used the term, but no, what they actually use is this:

> *Materially, in this case, refers to incidences where the AI fundamentally generated, structured, and/or substantively influenced the output, beyond just editorial.

I feel like at least one of the policy examples I sifted through did use the term, but I would be more willing to assume that the legal definition was used correctly from someone like the Foundation who almost certainly had legal counsel give it a pass before publishing. Since they didn't, you might be right, just, I don't know what is the true case here.

Edit: a quick ctrl-F for "originality" in all the policies that were mentioned turns up nothing, so, maybe this *was* the only place where it was mentioned.

Reviewer 15: The issue is that the proposed policy ties "trivial" changes to the "threshold of originality." If that threshold is understood as the level of originality required for copyright protection, then all LLM-generated output would automatically fall below it, not because the change is necessarily boilerplate or insignificant, but because LLM output is categorically non-copyrightable.

---

Given that, I think it would be better for the RFC to avoid relying on copyright terminology entirely, and instead define "trivial" directly in terms of the practical distinction it is trying to capture.

Reviewer: Okay, that actually does sound like a compelling argument. I would be okay using different terms for that reason.

Author: I agree this makes sense 👍 I've updated the policy to explicitly say what I mean by "trivial".

    - ℹ️ Review bot accounts must be blockable by individual users via the standard GitHub user-blocking mechanism. (Note that some GitHub "app" accounts post comments that look like users but cannot be blocked.)
    - ℹ️ If a more reliable tool, such as a linter or formatter, already exists for the language you're writing, we strongly suggest using that tool instead of or in addition to the LLM.
    - ℹ️ Configure LLM review tools to reduce false positives and excessive focus on trivialities, as these are common, exhausting failure modes.
    - ℹ️ LLM comments **must not** be blocking; reviewers must indicate which comments they want addressed.
        - In other words, reviewers must explicitly endorse an LLM comment before blocking a PR. They are responsible for their own analysis of the LLM's comment and cannot treat it as a CI failure.
    - ℹ️ This does not apply to private use of an LLM for reviews; see ✅ above.

All uses under "⚠️ Allowed with caveats" **must** disclose that an LLM was used.

#### Experiment: LLM-created code changes

> Solicited, non-critical, high-quality, well-tested, and well-reviewed code changes that are originally created by an LLM are allowed, with disclosure.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
Agreed-upon, non-critical, high-quality, well-tested, and well-reviewed code changes that are originally created by an LLM are allowed, with disclosure.
```

It's defined below, so it's OK either way as a policy matter, but we're, I think, looking for a different word than *solicited*.  That word suggests that the reviewer initiated the request.  Alice reached out to Bob, and said, "Bob, I'd like to you to use an LLM to prepare and submit change X to me."

What we actually mean is that the reviewer and the author talked ahead of time and agreed upon doing this.  So *agreed-upon* is the term that comes to mind.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 9: Yeah, I prefer this wording too :)

Reviewer 13: +1 to using a different word than solicited. But I think an important part of this is that it's *pre-agreed upon*: I want to generally not allow people to open a PR *and then* try to find a reviewer (because then we end up in review hot potato). (Opening as a draft is okay imo, since there is no expectation of having a review.)

Reviewer 26: Agreed.  Another word I considered was *prenegotiated*.  The word *prearranged* would be another option.

Author: I like “pre-arranged”.

If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to the [moderation team](mailto:rust-mods@rust-lang.org).
Don't try to hide it.

#### Penalties
The policies marked with a 🔨 follow the same guidelines as the code of conduct:
Violations will first result in a warning, and repeated violations may result in a ban.
- 🔨 Violations of the "Be honest" section

Other violations are left up to the discretion of reviewers and moderators.
For minor violations we recommend telling the author that we can't review the PR until it complies with the policy, with pointers to exactly what they need to do.
For major violations or extractive PRs, we recommend closing the PR or issue.

It is **not** ok to harrass a contributor for using an LLM.
All contributors must be treated with respect.
The code-of-conduct applies to *all* conversations in the Rust project.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally created by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

> ### The meaning of "originally created"

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
### The meaning of "originally generated"
```

I am still not comfortable with the use of "originally created" throughout this document, as it seems to imply that LLM output can itself be a creative work or meet a threshold of originality.

I think "originally generated" would be more precise and neutral terminology, and would avoid that implication.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Author: i have intentionally not made this change because "generated" implies that it applies to both edited and newly created text. i only intend for this section to apply to newly created text.

This document uses the phrase "originally created" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".

> No amount of editing can change how it was originally created; how it was generated sets the initial style and it's very hard to change once it's set.

Reviewer 26: I notice that the policy does not specifically mention LLM-backed autocompletion anywhere.  I suspect this may lead to confusion later.  Editors are now willing to fill in entire functions and files (and safety comments, other documentation, etc.), but people seem to mentally bucket this in a different category.

Given the intent of the policy, I'd expect it might want to say something along the lines of:

> This includes use of editor autocompletion when that feature is implemented using an LLM (check the documentation).  Once you accept a nontrivial autocompletion, the work is "originally created" by an LLM and no amount of editing (other than deleting it entirely) can remove that.

I'm not sure where you'd want to put this.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 13: I had a different conclusion: "autocompletion" usually doesn't meet the bar of originality and is thus usually allowed.

If it's "nontrivial", sure. But at least in my experience, I almost never get *those*.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think it's fair to clarify that the main bar is whether any actual functional code was written, not just syntax. The example I like to use is implementing `Iterator for &mut I`; it's a massive wall of text, but it's not exactly intellectually thrilling work, and honestly it should probably even be autocompletable by R-A and not even require an LLM to figure that out.

"Threshold of originality" is an okay thing to defer to since it's well-understood for copyright, but ultimately however that gets worded, I think it's where we should be aiming for. Anything else isn't worth litigating.

Reviewer 15: I have added comments elsewhere suggesting we should avoid relying on copyright terminology such as "threshold of originality." The concern here is that it risks a circular conclusion by treating all LLM-generated contributions as trivial by definition.

Reviewer: I don't think that's the case since all of this is going to be relative to moderator arbitration anyway, and the mods know what the rule actually means. But we can discuss that particular point in the other thread you opened about it.

For here, I think that the point about "auto-completed" code, from the context of code that is mostly syntax boilerplate and thus would be exactly the same regardless of who wrote it, is reasonable to allow and not litigate regardless of the tool being used to do it.

Reviewer 26: > I had a different conclusion: "autocompletion" usually doesn't meet the bar of originality and is thus usually allowed.

OK.  If that's our interpretation, I think we'd do well to write it down.  It's not enough for us to know where the bar is.  We want all contributors to feel secure that they know what they can do without violating our policies.  Asking people who want to comply to make a quasi-legal determination over the threshold of originality, to come to a conclusion themselves about whether using LLM-backed autocomplete is allowed, is, I think, too much.

Let's make that conclusion for people.  If we think LLM-backed autocompletion is OK, let's say that.  If there are exceptions we can articulate plainly, let's say those too.

Reviewer: Also worth pointing out that the default is almost certainly going to be lenience whenever the rules are unclear, even though I agree we should be explicit about that and let people know. There's almost no situation where an honest mistake is going to be treated with anything other than just explaining what went wrong and letting someone fix it.

I dunno what the best way to handle this is, but maybe just a general mention of this somewhere in the policy should suffice.

Reviewer 9: FWIW, I've seen AI autocomplete fill out complete tests with questionable quality while trying this out in my personal projects. The models used there are typically very fast and cheap, so the quality is not great.

I do think it's helpful to explicitly clarify a stance here, even if I'm pretty whatever on what the actual policy should be in this particular case.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

### Non-exhaustive policy

This policy does not aim to be exhaustive.
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Using an LLM for your own personal use is likely allowed ✅ 
- Showing LLM output to another human without solicitation is likely banned ❌

> - Making a decision based on LLM output requires disclosure ⚠️

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
If you have a use of LLMs in mind that isn't on this list, talk to people about it, and judge it in the spirit of this overview:
- Using an LLM for your own personal use is likely allowed ✅ 
- Showing LLM output to another human without solicitation is likely banned ❌
- Making a decision based on LLM output requires disclosure ⚠️
```

I think it's worth encouraging *conversation* here, not one-person decisions.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 9: Strongly agree here :) Doesn't need to be formal, but other inputs and conversations is very healthy.

### Conditions for modification or dissolution
This policy is not set in stone, and we can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Minor changes, such as typo fixes, only require a normal PR approval.
Major changes, such as adding a new rule or cancelling an existing rule, require:
- A simple majority of members of teams using rust-lang/rust.

> - No outstanding concerns from those members.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
- An accepted FCP by the teams using rust-lang/rust, with no outstanding concerns from members of those teams.
```

We don't typically do things by simple majority or voting, and I don't think we should start now.

(I say this *despite* the fact that I expect it would be easier to ratchet this policy stricter via simple majority.)

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Reviewer 26: > (I say this _despite_ the fact that I expect it would be easier to ratchet this policy stricter via simple majority.)

If it's any consolation, I conversely expect that it will be extremely challenging to ever relax this policy due to the fact that any such change can be blocked by a single concern from any one of dozens of people.

Reviewer 9: Yeah, I agree with TC here. I'm not convinced that consensus-based decision making is the best approach for this sort of sensitive policy. It is far too easy for this to deadlock, leaving a very bad status quo or endless exhausting discussion now or in the future.

No decision still produces an outcome, and it's important to be mindful about that when choosing governance mechanisms.

Reviewer 26: I'd like to hear from @jyn514 on what this custom mechanism is trying to achieve.

Author: i actually want this policy to not be too hard to change. that’s the point of the experiment clause — which isn’t meant to be permanent — and the reason i lowered the requirement from N-2 to a simple majority.

i thought i’d gotten this from https://forge.rust-lang.org/governance/council.html#the-consent-decision-making-process, but apparently even the lower requirement of “consent” is still N-2.

i’m ok with lowering this to the same level as an MCP (a single second, plus no objections during the 10 day period following). i still think it’s important to treat concerns as blocking.

i would also be ok with lowering the conditions for repealing this policy to the same conditions (a second + no objections), as long as there’s already a project wide policy in place.

Reviewer 13: I think I originally suggested simple majority. We have an FCP list of nearly people to adopt this policy; have the same FCP to make any non-trivial is not productive.

I'd be okay with an MCP-like process, but majority at least means that we guarantee that there are a variety of eyes.

Author: i've split the difference and required an MCP from all teams. that's for the reasons i discuss in [#council > relax requirements for a cross-team FCP to be accepted @ 💬](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/392734-council/topic/relax.20requirements.20for.20a.20cross-team.20FCP.20to.20be.20accepted/near/594902619): it wouldn't be fair to T-libs if a change could get approved without them even having a chance to look at it.

> - No outstanding concerns from those members.

Reviewer 26: It occurs to me that it's going to take some time to develop experience with this policy, for the experimental process to play out, etc.  Probably none of us want to see new change proposals roll in immediately.  It feels as though we might all do ourselves a favor by committing to avoid this — like a time lock safe.

@jyn514, what are your thoughts on setting a *moratorium* on changes to this policy for some term, maybe one year?

(Or maybe only on some kinds of changes to the policy, or maybe for six months, etc.)[^1]

[^1]: To those asking about why I needed to momentarily unlock the thread to post this review comment, I don't know either.  It surprised me too.  But GitHub refused to let me post it while the thread was locked.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

Author: I’m OK with that for the moderation policy. I think if we do that, we should have a set of guidelines in the dev-guide that we can modify like normal docs. That would contain things like the “run a second local adversarial model before publishing your change” recommendation, which aren’t required or checked, but which we think will make people’s code better.

Reviewer 26: That makes sense to me.

Author: I only want to do this if someone else also thinks this is a good idea; I don't think it makes sense as a "just-in-case" thing, it's too limiting.

Reviewer 26: After talking this over with others, I'm comfortable without this.

This policy can be dissolved in a few ways:

> - An accepted FCP by teams using rust-lang/rust.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
- A simple majority of members of teams using rust-lang/rust and that have ratified the policy.
- No outstanding concerns from those members.

This policy can be dissolved in a few ways:

- An accepted FCP by teams using rust-lang/rust and that have ratified the policy.
```

Something like this might help in being more clear about which teams need to be involved in these later actions.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..8444f54629dc472cdf0573237ff8eb03dc1a16a5)*

      - Changes that have a strong soundness impact, like the trait system, MIR building, or the query system are probably not ok.
3. "High-quality" means that it is held to at least the same standard as other code changes.
    Everyone reads code, not just the author and reviewer;
    we are not interested in "vibe-coded" PRs that degrade the quality of the codebase.
4. "Well-tested" means that you have covered all edge-cases that either you or the reviewer can think of.
    - ℹ️ LLM-created PRs will be held to a higher standard than human-created PRs, because LLMs make it easier to write tests.
    - ℹ️ If there is no existing test suite for a section of code, you must either write a new test suite or close the PR.
          There are no exceptions for "writing the tests seems hard".
5. "Well-reviewed" means the author and reviewer both commit to fully understanding the code.
    - ℹ️ All review requirements in [our existing review policy](../compiler/reviews.md#basic-reviewing-requirements) still apply.
    - ℹ️ A review from a project member does not substitute for self-review.
          Authors are expected to review their own code before posting and after each change.

>     - 💡 See the [dev-guide][llm-guidance] for additional suggestions.
> 
> LLM-created PRs must be tagged with a new `ai-assisted` label.
> All such PRs will be posted to a new (private) Zulip channel, which will be accessible to all members of the `rust-lang` organization.
> The goal of the channel is *not* to act as an additional gate-keeper on LLM-created PRs.
> Instead, it's to collect information about *whether this experiment is working*:
> Are people doing interesting and useful things with LLMs? Are they learning? Are they making repeat contributions?
> 
> Because the new channel is private, it will have higher-than-normal standards for what counts as on-topic.
> For example, the following are on-topic:
> - Whether a PR meets the criteria for the experiment exception
> - Whether a PR follows the policy in general
> 
> And the following are off-topic:
> - Technical and design discussions. These should be posted directly on the PR or in a public Zulip channel.
> - Discussions about effort, communication style, or intent
> - General discussions about the LLM policy
> ## Appendix

Reviewer 36: ```suggestion
- General discussions about the LLM policy

## Appendix
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..b3f6e88472dabf2dccad954aee65d078908f6496)*

Still others are working out their opinion.

Despite these differences, there are many values we all share:

- Building a community of deep experts in our collective projects.
- Building an inclusive community where all feel welcome and respected.

And many facts we agree on:

- Many people find LLM-generated code and writing deeply unpleasant to read or review.
- Many people find LLMs to be a significant aid to learning and discovery.
- LLMs are a new technology, and we are still learning how to use, moderate, and improve them.

With those facts and values in mind, the policy is designed with the following goals:

- Build an intentionally conservative policy that lets us maintain the standard of quality that Rust is known for.
- Limit LLM contributions to the very highest standard of quality, to show that our guideline of "better, not faster" isn't just words.
- Make the policy enforceable and easy to moderate.
- Make the policy consistent and easy to understand and summarize, even for people who haven't read it in detail.

### Moderation policy
#### It's not your job to play detective

> ["The optimal amount of fraud is not zero"](https://www.bitsaboutmoney.com/archive/optimal-amount-of-fraud/).

Reviewer 37: ```suggestion
```

Please consider removing this reference and explicitly making your
point here. I think situation presented in the Article is very different
from the detection of LLM use.

I think (please correct me if I am wrongly interpreting your intentions here)
the point you are trying to make here is that reliably detecting if
something was written  with LLM use in all instances is probably
not worth the cost it would incur even if it was possible.

In contrast authentication is a problem that can be reasonably (and at low
cost) solved with modern cryptography. Due to this I have a hard time
interpreting the cited article as anything but a fluff piece defending
the sorrow state of payment authorization (and its backing
authentication technology) in the credit card industry by presenting a false
dichotomy between more secure authentication and continued convenience.

To me the central advantage of Rust is improving the security and correctness
of programs by technical means (more compile time guarantees), while this
article espouses the opposite (continued use of "three digits on the back"
in the face of convenient and more secure modern alternatives (e.g. ChipTAN).),
so I do not think it should be uncritically referred to in a Rust policy.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..39ce3bb0b1e70279aa765e3206f2d4505d585a09)*

Reviewer: Poking around Wikipedia guidance on this issue, since I've mentioned being a big fan, these two seem relevant as alternatives:

* [WP:BUREAU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:BUREAU) (Wikipedia is not a bureaucracy)
* [WP:IAR](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/WP:IAR) (Ignore all rules)

Essentially: the rules are not a contract; they are a series of accepted guidelines that have been chosen by a community. Rules have the potential to be misused, and so, while they should be taken seriously, they cannot be taken *so seriously* because of this risk.

Additionally, ignore all rules says: if a rule prevents you from [doing your job], ignore it.

The takeaways here are that while it may seem ideal to try and detect *every* violation, the consequences of doing so far outweigh the benefits, and so, some people will ultimately "get away" with breaking the rules. This is the cost of civility and ensuring that everyone is treated fairly.

Eventually, if something seriously causes issues, it will be dealt with. But until then, sometimes, we might have to just leave something be.

Author: I am extremely not interested in discussing the internals of the US financial system.

Don't try to be the police for whether someone has used an LLM.
If it's clear they've broken the rules, point them to this policy;
if it's borderline, [report it to the mods](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) and move on.
You are not required to "actively look" for whether an LLM was involved.

Reporting to moderation is not intended to be a penalty.
The mod team is interested in seeing non-violations as well as violations.
As always, the mod team is free to exercise their own judgement and discretion.

#### Be honest

> Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM, or attempting to hide the extent of the use, is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.

Reviewer 15: If something is to be treated as a Code of Conduct violation, then what constitutes that violation should ideally be defined in the actual Code of Conduct itself, rather than indirectly through a separate LLM policy.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..39ce3bb0b1e70279aa765e3206f2d4505d585a09)*

Reviewer: So, I *have* gone through with this point in my RFC proposal to explicitly delineate this: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3959

But for better or worse, this policy does not have the scope to change the COC, and so, it should not. For now, I think we can consider this an interpretation of:

* Please be kind and courteous. There’s no need to be mean or rude.

Since, well, refusing to work with people under a given policy and lying about it kind of breaks that rule. I agree that we shouldn't be relying on weird wording permanently, and I would consider it reasonable to try and explicitly edit the COC to add an explicit point about honesty being required for all of the vague points it makes to be reasonable, but strongly believe that we should not be editing the COC without at minimum a team-wide RFC.

So, I guess that the main point here is whether folks are acceptable as this being merely a *clarification* of the COC, or if the wording should be reduced to imply that this is merely a serious violation of *this* policy, which can still receive a strong moderation action in response.

Reviewer 15: That framing is doing more work than the underlying CoC language supports.

"Please be kind and courteous" can reasonably cover tone, hostility, and interpersonal conduct, but it does not naturally extend to a general requirement of honesty about workflow choices.

Treating it that way in this policy effectively expands the scope of the CoC through the back door, without going through the RFC process.

Reviewer 5: I somewhat share this concern generally. Trying to figure out what existing CoC points a requirement for honesty when asked about LLM use would fall under..

What do you think about "attention-stealing behavior"? 
> - Likewise any spamming, trolling, flaming, baiting or other attention-stealing behavior is not welcome. 

It's our main issue we're trying to solve: undisclosed LLM use takes a lot of time and attention to discover and deal with, unless moderators can ask people for clarification instead of doing detective work. Dishonesty kills that solution, and is thus stealing our attention & time.

There's also the "Remarks that moderators find inappropriate whether listed in the code of conduct or not, are also not allowed" clause.

Maybe it *would* be an improvement to slightly reword this section to make reference to either of these points in order to explain *why* it's considered a CoC violation?

Reviewer 16: I second what @steffahn says: these violations, at a high-level, are basically a violation of the trust contract between you (contributor) and us (Rust project) and as such we don't want these violations and we need to tell people why. But I also think that trying to shoehorn the CoC to fit is not entirely the point here.

Author: I am astounded to discover that there is *anyone* who doesn't believe that "lying to a moderator" should be a CoC violation. If you think we should state that explicitly in the CoC, fine, I look forward to your PR. Otherwise I am not interested in re-litigating the exact way the wording applies here.

Reviewer 2: I'm resolving this comment. Happy to chat about it in general(please DM me), but it's not really relevant for the policy except for clarifying something already true.

Reviewer 15: > I am astounded to discover that there is _anyone_ who doesn't believe that "lying to a moderator" should be a CoC violation.

I do not think the disagreement here is really about whether knowingly lying to moderators during an active moderation process can be sanctionable. Most people would probably agree that it can.

The concern is that the current wording is substantially broader than that. The text talks about:

> lying about whether you’ve used an LLM, or attempting to hide the extent of the use

That can encompass omissions, disclosure disagreements, or differing interpretations of what "extent of use" means, entirely outside a moderation context.

I think that distinction matters, especially given that @clarfonthey has already opened a separate RFC proposing explicit CoC amendments in this area.

Reviewer: > That can encompass omissions, disclosure disagreements, or differing interpretations of what "extent of use" means, entirely outside a moderation context.

Yes, and these will be taken into consideration for moderation action. The point here is to make it clear what is expected of users so they know the severity of their actions. If you lie about something not relevant to policy, it doesn't matter, but if you lie about something that we have explicitly delineated as important for the sake of policy, that shows an open belligerence to the rules that needs to be dealt with. If you don't want to follow the rules, you don't have to be here; similarly, you're forgiven for any misunderstandings about the rules if you need to be explained them first before following them.

> Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM, or attempting to hide the extent of the use, is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.

Reviewer 26: ```suggestion
Conversely, when asked by a moderator about whether or how you've used an LLM, lying or attempting to hide the extent of the use is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.
```

On reflection, a recent set of exchanges on these threads seemed significant to me.  I thought, "have we each been reading this differently?  That would explain why there's been so much frustration: we've been talking past each other".  Consider:

@steffahn [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3296666612):

> It's our main issue we're trying to solve: undisclosed LLM use takes a lot of time and attention to discover and deal with, unless moderators can ask people for clarification instead of doing detective work. Dishonesty kills that solution, and is thus stealing our attention & time.

And @jyn514 [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3297249749):

> I am astounded to discover that there is _anyone_ who doesn't believe that "lying to a moderator" should be a CoC violation.

And @oli-obk gave that +1.

Then @xtqqczze [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3297551274):

> I do not think the disagreement here is really about whether knowingly lying to moderators during an active moderation process can be sanctionable. Most people would probably agree that it can.
>
> The concern is that the current wording is substantially broader than that. The text talks about:
>
> > lying about whether you’ve used an LLM, or attempting to hide the extent of the use
>
> That can encompass omissions, disclosure disagreements, or differing interpretations of what "extent of use" means, entirely outside a moderation context.

My own reading had been similar to that of @xtqqczze, and that's the context in which I'd separately [raised](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3293554280) enforceability concerns (due to the broad scope it would create for CoC accusations).  If we mean this other thing, then I don't have those concerns and the reasons for frustration come into focus for me.

Is that true?  Do we mean something closer to the text suggested here?  Have we therefore been talking past each other?

I'm not looking for a long thread on this.[^1]  As I [said](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3295216086), I take @oli-obk's word that whatever we mean here won't be a problem in practice.  But it occurred to me that maybe we have more agreement than we thought.  Maybe our frustration was due to reading this differently.  If that's the case, that seems worth us knowing, whatever we write down.

[^1]: And, if you don't mind, I'm most curious to hear from those mentioned above and @apiraino, whose comments would also make more sense to me with this reading, as this is about seeing whether we had overlooked common ground.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..39ce3bb0b1e70279aa765e3206f2d4505d585a09)*

Reviewer: I think that this is an undue burden on moderators since a majority of the people asking these questions will be reviewers, and requiring a moderator to step in to ask is just going to be unnecessarily bothering people over this.

I get your interpretation here, but, I don't think that we should specifically require escalating something into a moderator conflict when most of the time reviewers will be able to litigate this.

Reviewer: Also, again, I feel like I'm just repeating myself on arguments that I've already made, *directly to you*, and it becomes increasingly harder to take some of these suggestions seriously.

When you see that lying *to a moderator* is against the rules, this immediately begs the question… so, it's okay to lie, as long as it's *not* to a mod? What does the rule gain by adding specificity here, besides giving bad actors extra ways that they *think* they can use to break the rules, even if their actions will ultimately be fruitless?

I looked through those arguments I've already made for the one most relevant here, and hilariously, it happened to be [exactly the same one I linked earlier, when responding to you](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3295117088). So, this marks the third time you have apparently failed to take in its contents or acknowledge them: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3950#discussion_r3175618688

Rules should be written based upon desired behaviour, not drawing boundaries to be crossed. We don't want people to lie because they think it lets them get around an existing policy. Will lies to moderators be weighed more heavily than lies to reviewers? Maybe! But these are the kinds of things the moderators can litigate, and should not be things we explicitly delineate in policy.

We just want people to know that lying is *not* a loophole here, and by adding in extra visible loopholes, this directly contradicts the purpose of this rule.

> Conversely, lying about whether you've used an LLM, or attempting to hide the extent of the use, is considered a [code of conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) violation.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
Contributors are expected to be honest about their use of LLMs and the extent of that use. Deliberately misrepresenting such use is not welcome and may result in moderation action.
```

In reference to this https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3301093128:

> Rules should be written based upon desired behaviour, not drawing boundaries to be crossed.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..39ce3bb0b1e70279aa765e3206f2d4505d585a09)*

Reviewer 26: That does read better.

Reviewer 11: I also prefer the positive framing of it.

Conversely, you're expected to be honest about your use of LLMs and the extent of that use.
If you are not sure where something you would like to do falls in this policy, please talk to the [moderation team](mailto:rust-mods@rust-lang.org).
Don't try to hide it.

> 
> Deliberately misrepresenting your use of LLMs is not welcome and [may result in moderation action](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/#moderation).
> #### Penalties

Reviewer 36: ```suggestion
Deliberately misrepresenting your use of LLMs is not welcome and [may result in moderation action](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/#moderation).

#### Penalties
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..b3f6e88472dabf2dccad954aee65d078908f6496)*

> - 🔨 Violations of the "Be honest" section

Reviewer 26: One of the stated goals of this document is to:

> Make the policy enforceable and easy to moderate.

But how do we plan to enforce the "be honest" section?  How are we to judge whether someone's use of an LLM exceeded what was disclosed?

That seems an important detail.  This document doesn't talk anywhere about standards of proof.  Other CoC items are enforceable on visible behavior.  This one is harder.

False accusations of LLM use are widespread.  This policy makes each accusation into a moderation matter that must be litigated.  An accused Project member can't just ignore a false accusation as an annoyance when we've decided to treat this as a bannable CoC violation.  We will have raised the stakes.

Surely we don't expect the accused to prove a negative.  And surely we don't intend to judge people as liars based on faulty stylistic heuristics.  So what is the plan for how we adjudicate this fairly, consistently, and while lowering the burden on moderators?[^1]

[^1]: For anyone wondering why I needed to momentarily unlock the thread to post this review comment, I don't know either.  But GitHub refused to let me post it while the thread was locked ("Failed to save comment: Issue is locked.").

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..39ce3bb0b1e70279aa765e3206f2d4505d585a09)*

Reviewer 38: Hrm. I'm thinking on this a bit.

This does seem like an important point. I'd worry about accusations that cannot be disproved leading to a moderation action.

What would be the mechanics of the accusation resolution?

Reviewer 16: @traviscross it's about trust.

You can assume good faith and cannot bullet-proof malice but we will do our best to tell one from the other. I think the word "experimentation" in this document is also about this and I wouldn't block on this concern.

> This policy makes each accusation into a moderation matter that must be litigated

Not exactly. This document indicates guidelines for project members and for us (mods) as well as expectations from contributions. Mods are called to help - and I am quoting the document - in case of "major violations or extractive PRs" while reviewers are asked to be helpful in case of "minor violations". I wouldn't read too much into it.

---

At the RustWeek Niko said something about the Rust funding initiative that I think also applies here: maybe we won't get everything right *immediately* but we will have something out *now* and we will iterate as needed.

Author: Note also that I have an entire "Don’t play detective" section dedicated to discussing this.

Reviewer 26: @apiraino: I'm trying to connect it, but I don't really follow how what you're saying engages with the concern I'm raising.  The lines I'm commenting on above are the only part of the policy that is made coequal with other CoC items.  If I accuse a Project member of harassment (a CoC item), I'd expect the mods would investigate to see whether that occurred.  Similarly, if I accuse another member of lying about the extent of covered LLM use, given the policy treats this as a CoC item, I'd presume the mods would investigate to determine whether that happened.

My question isn't about trust, or good faith, or malice — those would seem to come after we determine the facts, and I'm unsure how we plan to determine facts here.  My worry is that we may only have two bad options: guessing and unenforceability.  I'm wondering whether (and hoping that) we have a better idea for this.  We're talking about judgments that will have real effects on people.  This isn't the kind of thing I'd want to leave to experimentation.

@jyn514: The "it's not your job to play detective" section mostly gives guidance to *reporters* (those who believe the policy has been broken).  I'm asking how we expect the *moderators* (to whom the reports go) to adjudicate these reports.  On that, the section says only, "the mod team is free to exercise their own judgment and discretion", but I don't see how this solves the epistemological problem.  And asking the mod team to decide the undecidable seems in tension with the goal of making "the policy enforceable and easy to moderate."

Reviewer 31: I feel the only thing you can do here is to go with "innocent until proven guilty". My stances are very anti-LLM but I would rather have some LLM outputs slip in than have witch hunts against innocent contributors.

Reports should include as much evidence as possible, so it makes LLM usage very obvious and reduces moderation burden.

Also, I believe https://cyrneko.eu/ai-policy.html has a bunch of good ideas.

Reviewer 15: I agree that "innocent until proven guilty" is the only workable approach here. What other standard could realistically be applied?

Once failure to disclose LLM use becomes a CoC violation, the project implicitly needs a standard of proof. But allegations of undisclosed LLM use are often inherently hard to verify, so the burden of proof pretty much has to be, in other words: "beyond a reasonable doubt”.

And if a case really is obvious beyond reasonable doubt, it probably does not need to become a moderation matter in the first place, the contributor can simply be pointed at the policy and asked to correct the disclosure. The difficult cases are precisely the ones where certainty is not realistically achievable.

Reviewer: Honestly, this thread to me demonstrates just a general lack of awareness of how moderation works. This is further bolstered by a moderator explaining that this is not a concern, followed by a lack of understanding still.

Moderation is a neverending compromise of fairness and trying to balance accusations with reality. There are lots of things that have to be considered and "how can we possibly detect whether someone is lying" has the incredibly easy answer of, sometimes we can't, and we just move on.

The purpose of carving out honesty as required here is to let people know that it alone is not okay. Even if someone tries to get away with it for months, if all we find out after months is that they lied, that is a serious issue worth moderation. By how things are worded, we intentionally do not want to punish people who make mistakes, but want to clarify that people who have lied and have been caught will not be treated as someone who just made a few mistakes (no punishment) whereas someone who lied for months is treated severely.

The idea that every moderation claim is taken seriously is equally misleading. It's extremely possible for random strangers to accuse people of harassment with little evidence and moderation has to account for this differently than a team member accusing a team member of harassment. Evidence has to be weighed here and if someone is accused of lying without much merit, it has to be catalogued and ignored for now.

Simply looking at the rule of honesty and thinking "how could this possibly be enforced" is just a complete misunderstanding of how moderation is done.

Reviewer 3: And also, a ban is not a one-way ticket. It is always followed by an invitation to discuss it with the moderators. So while false accusations can make people feel bad, it's not an irreversible decision and we have to balance it. Having no ability to ban at all will be way worse.

Reviewer 39: Outsider piping up to support clarfonthey as a voice of sanity here:

Anti-trolling rules are "unenforceable in theory," but moderation does the best it can, and it is absolutely better to have it than not. There's a mindblowing amount of defeatism lately at the prospect of defending communities against bad actors proxying for bots, but just like trolls they're bad actors that can be mitigated, albeit imperfectly, with a human-centric approach.

You talk to people. You make judgment calls, you escalate gradually, and sometimes you discover problems late or make mistakes and adjust. You default to kindness for those who need it. Repeat offenders do not. It's messy but it's a damn sight better than surrendering at the outset, and it makes your community a better place for the human beings living there.

Reviewer: > And also, a ban is not a one-way ticket. It is always followed by an invitation to discuss it with the moderators. So while false accusations can make people feel bad, it's not an irreversible decision and we have to balance it. Having no ability to ban at all will be way worse.

This is especially worth pointing out since the current anti-slop provisions rely on bans heavily for this reason. A ban prevents more contributions until a person speaks to moderators, which means actual spammers can't do anything more and genuine people can just have a quick chat to revert the decision. These are just extra tools to help mitigate harm.

Reviewer 26: The items in the [Code of Conduct](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/) can be decided mostly on what is immediately available (e.g., GitHub comments, meeting minutes) or is discoverable (e.g., DMs you can ask for, people you can interview to find out what's not in the minutes).  Harassment, e.g., leaves artifacts that *are* the mechanisms of harassment.  Same for trolling.  Same for spam.  Determining whether someone lied about something that only that person may know is a different category entirely.

The standard of proof we'd employ for this isn't obvious.  The document doesn't say.  A high standard seems both necessary and in tension with making "the policy enforceable and easy to moderate."  People, including in this project, have made confident-sounding accusations based on nothing more than bad stylistic heuristics.  At a minimum, we need to write down our proof standard to make clear we're not deciding things this way.  Yet that leaves the other question.[^1]

[^1]: Edit: I've reworded this paragraph slightly to better cover both sides of the tension I'm describing.  I don't think it affects the substance of any replies.  See the history if curious.

> And also, a ban is not a one-way ticket. It is always followed by an invitation to discuss it with the moderators. So while false accusations can make people feel bad, it's not an irreversible decision and we have to balance it.

Banning a Project member over a false accusation (e.g., because it was decided on guesswork) — or even issuing a formal moderation warning — would be incredibly disrespectful and would reasonably cause many Project members to just leave, even if there were an invitation to discuss it later.  We can't afford these losses.

Project members are going to accuse other Project members of this.  It's already been happening.  In giving it punitive force, we need to be clear on how we plan to handle it.

Reviewer: TC, it is very hard to take what you're saying at face value because it seems to openly ignore what's being said here in favour of finding any possible reason to dislike requiring honesty as part of the code of conduct.

Like, we can also read the code of conduct that you've explicitly linked, and it provides counterexamples that you're obviously excluding. Like, the idea that everything can be concretely summed up as a paper trail to be followed is utterly ridiculous. How do we gauge whether someone is adequately fostering a "welcoming environment"? Ultimately, there will be evidence to follow, but the *start* of the investigation will likely be vibes alone. Rarely is someone just going to say "I am a filthy racist" out loud; it'll be more subtle.

Kind of like how lying can be subtle to detect.

Something being difficult to gauge is a *feature* of moderation policies, not an *issue*, and it is especially frustrating to see you argue this here considering how [I have already explicitly explained it before, to you](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3950#discussion_r3175618688), and yet you are trying to find reasons to disagree despite this.

I would love to assume good faith, but until I see you seriously responding to arguments as if you have both read them and understood them, I cannot do that here.

Reviewer 16: I think we are getting a bit carried away from the core of the question that @traviscross asked ("how we plan to determine facts here") and I find it fair to grant him the same good faith that should be granted when talking about how to cope with the wide grey area of cases that "look like slop but maybe they're not". I like how @miangraham characterized how it can work (thanks).

> People, including in this project, have made confident-sounding accusations based on nothing more than bad stylistic heuristics.

to be more specific: heuristics that were built on enough cases to trigger knee-jerk reactions.

(I am Rust project moderator so this topic touches directly my work)

Reviewer 2: With my mod hat on: this policy is easily enforced. Either mods come to the conclusion that yes, malicious behaviour has been going on, so actions are taken, or they do not, and no action is taken.

By delegating the entire thing to moderation, community members only raise symptoms to us and do not need to make value judgements. Just like with anything else that is not clearly provable, we make judgement calls when something is a problem. We also can detect patterns that aren't obvious, especially in the presence of things getting deleted after the fact.

We're not gonna go on a conspiracy level search for whether someone is lying. And if we realize there is an issue with this policy we will obviously ask for adjustment.

Unless we have something for enforcing the "you need to disclose" rule, the rule becomes meaningless.

The honesty clause exists to avoid people lying because they violated the disclosure rule by lack of knowledge. We had ppl reply upon asked disclose cheerfully and publicly and there was no shitstorm or harassment. I expect it will be quite the contrary. Clear rules make for clear behaviour of our community members.

Reviewer: > I find it fair to grant him the same good faith that should be granted when talking about how to cope with the wide grey area of cases that "look like slop but may they're not"

Oh, absolutely, I think that it's a fair argument to address, and it's why I typed up my original comments without any such accusations; I think that there are plenty of people who simply don't understand how moderation works and this is a wonderful learning opportunity to talk about that.

I just know that TC has no excuse in particular to pretend that he has no idea how moderation works because:

1. He is on the leadership council
2. I have explained to him, exhaustively, in his own proposed moderation policy, how moderation works specifically from the lens of his proposals: https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-comments/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3950

I think that there are plenty of things he's saying that have merit, just, the fact that he has chosen to continue arguing *outside* the bounds of merit is sufficient reason to call him out on it. An LC member should absolutely be held to a much higher standard than your average person reading this policy who genuinely probably has no idea how moderation works, and again, I think that the context of talking about policy is a great place to teach people that.

I just refuse to sit idly by when TC so obviously ignores the arguments presented to him because he should know better and *should* be called out on it. Maybe he should not be expected to know how moderation works despite his position, but he should be expected to know after being explicitly told, in the same thread he was told so, at least to the extent of *trying* to engage with the text presented.

Reviewer 26: @oli-obk said:

> With my mod hat on: this policy is easily enforced. Either mods come to the conclusion that yes, malicious behaviour has been going on, so actions are taken, or they do not, and no action is taken.

OK.  I take @oli-obk's word this won't be a problem in practice.

Other violations are left up to the discretion of reviewers and moderators.
For minor violations we recommend telling the author that we can't review the PR until it complies with the policy, with pointers to exactly what they need to do.
For major violations or extractive PRs, we recommend closing the PR or issue.

> It is **not** ok to harrass a contributor for using an LLM.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
It is **not** ok to harass a contributor on the basis of actual or perceived LLM use.
```

Reviewer: On its face it might be worth just expanding this if the desire is to use the COC definition of harassment. It's not okay to harass people, but also, people are allowed to disagree on the right approach to things, and this is not harassment.

So, as-is, rather than change this sentence, it might be better to simply add:

Genuine harassment remains a COC violation. This way it still gets the intended point across (don't harass people) while only stating that *genuine* harassment is a serious COC violation. This way, it doesn't potentially belittle what people are experiencing (even if some people might interpret things wrong) while clarifying that many of these *are* genuine COC issues.

In this way, it's framed as: genuine harassment is a COC violation, *and you should not try to tread that line*, without accidentally implying that anything a contributor might perceive as harassment here is a COC issue. Since, at least when it comes to LLMs, a lot of people seem to interpret any friction as harassment, when that's not the case, and we want to carve out a way to have that nuance without trying to belittle people's experiences.

Reviewer 15: What struck me with the current wording of the moderation policy section is that it seems to invert the relationship between the policy and the CoC.

On the one hand, conduct that is already a direct CoC issue (harassment) is described comparatively softly as merely "not ok". Meanwhile, this document attempts to elevate a new category of behavior (insufficient disclosure / "attempting to hide the extent of use") into an explicit CoC violation from within a separate policy.

That feels backwards to me. If something genuinely warrants CoC-level enforcement, then the CoC itself should define it as such.

Author: That is quite literally the next sentence in the policy:
> It is not ok to harrass a contributor for using an LLM. All contributors must be treated with respect. The code-of-conduct applies to all conversations in the Rust project.

I'm extremely frustrated with people taking individual quotes out of context and nitpicking wording rather than engaging with the spirit of the policy. If you have better wording, suggest it.

Reviewer: I will apologise for responding to this the way I did since, well, I hadn't read further down either. I think that the context after this is sufficient, and this *should* be resolved as unreasonable.

Reviewer 15: I understand the frustration, and I apologize if my earlier comments came across as nitpicking or ignoring the broader context. The suggested wording changes were made with the full "moderation policy" section in mind, not from isolated quotes.

Part of the concern is that this section appears to function, at least in part, as a clarification or interpretation of how the CoC applies to LLM-related conduct. In that context, the exact wording and relative framing matters.

The intention was not to dispute the spirit of the policy. It was to avoid wording that could inadvertently imply that dishonesty about LLM use is a more explicit or more clearly defined CoC concern than harassment itself, particularly when harassment is described comparatively softly as merely "not ok".

Ultimately, the concern is that this policy shouldn't need to clarify or implicitly extend the CoC in the first place if the CoC itself was more explicit about expectations.

Author: > If you think we should state that explicitly in the CoC, fine, I look forward to your PR. Otherwise I am not interested in re-litigating the exact way the wording applies here.

It is **not** ok to harass a contributor for using an LLM.
All contributors must be treated with respect.
The code-of-conduct applies to *all* conversations in the Rust project.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally created by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

> ### The meaning of "originally created"

Reviewer 36: I think this should say 
```suggestion
### The meaning of "originally created by an LLM"
```
because "originally created" _by itself_ doesn't mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)"

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..b3f6e88472dabf2dccad954aee65d078908f6496)*

Reviewer 15: I would prefer the wording "generated by an LLM" rather than "originally created". It feels more consistent with the statement that "Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM." This wording also avoids implying that LLM output can itself be a creative work.

3. "High-quality" means that it is held to at least the same standard as other code changes.
    Everyone reads code, not just the author and reviewer;
    we are not interested in "vibe-coded" PRs that degrade the quality of the codebase.
4. "Well-tested" means that you have covered all edge-cases that either you or the reviewer can think of.
    - ℹ️ LLM-created PRs will be held to a higher standard than human-created PRs, because LLMs make it easier to write tests.
    - ℹ️ If there is no existing test suite for a section of code, you must either write a new test suite or close the PR.
          There are no exceptions for "writing the tests seems hard".
5. "Well-reviewed" means the author and reviewer both commit to fully understanding the code.
    - ℹ️ All review requirements in [our existing review policy](../compiler/reviews.md#basic-reviewing-requirements) still apply.
    - ℹ️ A review from a project member does not substitute for self-review.
          Authors are expected to review their own code before posting and after each change.
    - 💡 See the [dev-guide][llm-guidance] for additional suggestions.

> LLM-created PRs must be tagged with a new `ai-assisted` label.

Reviewer 40: I wanted to raise a point specifically around using a PR label instead of something like a `Co-Authored By:` or other commit message.

With a PR title, the provenance of LLM contributions is going to get lost outside github, and not exist in the git history. For automation or searching of LLM attribution, we will be reliant on utilizing the GitHub API for filtering PRs which were labeled, and then cross-referencing that with git commits. Other projects have specifically gone with the git commit addition because the LLM provenance of commits exists within the history. It remains clear what code was submitted by an LLM. The label approach will not make this clear outside the GitHub UI.

Additionally, the `Co-Authored-By` or similiar commit additions also generally include the model name, for further attribution. the label excludes that.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..f716356205795cbca88af27f6bf4cc5908b6006e)*

Author: one possibility here is to have a bot that automatically edits the label into the PR description. then bors will automatically pick it up in the merge commit, and we can filter it through the git history that way.

my only concern here is around brigading, i worry that people outside the project will — in a year, two, three years from now — go through the history to harass people. at least on PRs we're able to lock the thread, i don't think github has any kind of moderation controls on commits themselves, even though it lets people comment.

putting this *only* on the bors merge commit makes me feel a little better about things, since it naturally directs people to the pr but ... idk. it kinda worries me that putting this in the commit is so permanent. we can't remove these without rewriting history for the whole main branch.

Author: let me ask: what's your goal with establishing provenance like this?

Reviewer 40: There are a few scenarios I'd find it useful; one is immediate information and answering questions, and another is more threat-model based on future possibilities I feel uncomfortable painting ourselves into a corner for.

I think for answering basic questions like: 
- "what is the entirety of code changes conducted by LLM in this project?" 
- "What models are being used in our project?"
- "What code was committed by a specific model found to be problematic?"

Given the experimental allowances here, we are making it prohibitively difficult to *answer* any meaningful questions about the experiment with objective data. I assume during the term of the experiment, we want to be able to answer questions like what models were used, how each model performed, what areas they seemed to excel or struggle in, etc. We *can* still distill this from the PRs alone; however, that information will be non-uniform and ad-hoc, making it an entirely manual exercise in gathering data. I worry we are limiting ourselves to subjective results and/or excessive work for answering anything like that as the experiment progresses.

Looking into the future, we can threat model around potential circumstances where we need this information. I can iterate here if desired, but the *main* burning concern I have for an actionable, and likely, future need is: What if a model is deemed problematic, and we need to remove all contributions by it? I could see a government, or the project, making this kind of call in the near future (ex: the US government bans a model, or the project wants to ban a racist model, or a model is found to be maliciously manipulated). I think we need a built-in mechanism to respond to that. 

As written, this document strictly lets us identify what PRs had an LLM involved - we can't tangible answer any of the above without entirely manual and social mechanisms (Filter `ai-assisted`, contact the author, ask what models they used, ask what code was written by the LLM, etc)

Author: > What if a model is deemed problematic, and we need to remove all contributions by it? 

I simply do not think this is realistic. This is on-par with "What if we want to switch the license and everyone but a single contributor agrees, how can we rip out their code?" Code doesn't work like that. Changes are built on top of each other; rewriting the change "as-if" a previous change had never existed is usually tantamount to a full rewrite.

Author: That said, I can understand the desire for an audit log — if we require people to disclose on the PR which model they used, would that address some of your concerns?

Reviewer 13: I really don't think model disclosure is something that we should add.

In general, I also don't know that tagging commits in any way is great. Things like Co-authored By: tags, there's already debate on whether that is meaningful (because there's an open question on whether or not LLMs can count as authors).

Maybe we could modify bors to tag the merge commit in some way (it already adds r=author). This, of course, means that these PRs wouldn't likely be eligible to be included in rollups, but maybe that's what we want right now.

Reviewer: I don't think that we want more code to be excluded from rollups; things are already slow enough to merge as-is. If we're concerned a particular change is low-quality, we shouldn't merge it, not just exclude it from rollups.

Reviewer 2: Just to throw a perspective from a vehement LLM critic into the pot:

I don't think tagging is useful. I don't know what we'd ever want to use it for. I personally even have a negative reaction to it. Which I don't with a human written disclosure. Can't really explain it well. 

I don't think naming the model is useful. At present it's slapping advertisements over our commits, and in the future it is useless because the models change and get replaced so fast.

Reviewer 41: I would like to emphasise that, in many countries, LLMs are not "authors" from a legal point of view. Per european law, it's pretty clear that author rights apply to _original human creation_ (the degree of acceptable assistance is debatable, but in any case, the AI by itself isn't an author). Therefore, it would be misleading to use `Co-authored-by` for AI-generated code. At the very least, it should be named something else… But in that case, I also feel like it's kind of an ad.

Reviewer 8: I don't think we *need* to tag each commit. I do think we should arrange something in the bors merge message, to make data gathering easier as part of the LLM experiment.

Reviewer 14: IANAL but I don't think the legality of authorship is implied by bots (LLM or not) using the `Co-Authored-By:`/`Author:` field, just like no one questioned the commits "authored" by bors or [dependabot](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/commit/8cc4c20c1dc316fec00bfbef0f23939130e44426).

That said, I think `Co-Authored-By:` should *not* be enforced. Besides being [ad-like](https://github.com/anthropics/claude-code/issues/29999), these LLM `Co-Authored-By:` in the wild mostly comes from Claude Code and Copilot only. Other tools like Codex or Antigravity don't do commit attribution trailer (unless given custom instructions), so for auditing use you'll by-default miss half of the picture. Plus, tools like Copilot and Cursor and OpenCode attribute `Co-Authored-By:` to the tools themselves despite actually calling someone else's model, making it even less useful to answer *"What **models** are being used in our project?"*. 

> I don't think we need to tag each commit. I do think we should arrange something in the bors merge message, to make data gathering easier as part of the LLM experiment.

If the disclosure is written in the PR description it will be automatically included in the merge commit. In such case a `git log --grep` or other text analysis tool should be enough for auditing.

But this means this guideline needs to specify that the disclosure must be placed within the PR description rather than a separate comment. 🤔

Reviewer 40: > But this means this guideline needs to specify that the disclosure must be placed within the PR description rather than a separate comment. 🤔

I agree. The core of this is that we are framing this as an experiment to see how the policy and LLMs perform for code contributions, with no way to attribute what was used during the experiment.

> I don't think we need to tag each commit. I do think we should arrange something in the bors merge message, to make data gathering easier as part of the LLM experiment.

I'd find this compromise at least meeting our needs for data gathering. At a much less extreme level, I really just want to be able to see what code was written by what model during this experiment - anecdotal feedback from the users is also useful; but I think the future opportunity to see how specific models perform objectively is going to be a data point we want out of this experiment. Having this somewhere machine-readable (either github API or the git log) is an acceptable compromise.

Reviewer 8: The model is useful, but personally the thing I see as most critical is recording whether a merge was of LLM-assisted code at all.

Reviewer 16: > but I think the future opportunity to see how specific models perform objectively is going to be a data point we want out of this experiment

Paraphrasing, in other words you're saying (IIUC): "if a bug or a vuln is introduced by an LLM, I want to be able to know if the culprit commit was LLM assisted or was it entirely a human error". I feel that in practice such a goal is hard to grasp. If we wanted *real* code accountability for this or other similar scenarios, there are other tools or regulatory frameworks for that (which I am not personally familiar with, but *do* I know they exist)

(and I agree with the previous comments that at the current stage it would in practice just turn out unwillingly into free adverstisement).

Don't try to hide it.

Deliberately misrepresenting your use of LLMs is not welcome and [may result in moderation action](https://rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct/#moderation).

#### Penalties
The policies marked with a 🔨 follow the same guidelines as the code of conduct:
Violations will first result in a warning, and repeated violations may result in a ban.
- 🔨 Violations of the "Be honest" section

Other violations are left up to the discretion of reviewers and moderators.
For minor violations we recommend telling the author that we can't review the PR until it complies with the policy, with pointers to exactly what they need to do.
For major violations or extractive PRs, we recommend closing the PR or issue.

It is **not** ok to harass a contributor for using an LLM.
All contributors must be treated with respect.
The code-of-conduct applies to *all* conversations in the Rust project.

### Responsibility

Your contributions are your responsibility; you cannot place any blame on an LLM.
- ℹ️ This includes when asking people to address review comments originally created by an LLM. See "review bots" under ⚠️ above.

> ### The meaning of "originally created by an LLM"

Author: [you've said this before](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3252966458), yes. please don't duplicate comments.

> This document uses the phrase "originally created" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".

Reviewer 36: sorry, should've flagged this one as well
```suggestion
This document uses the phrase "originally created by an LLM" to mean "text that was generated by an LLM (and then possibly edited by a human)".
```

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..37557b08cc363659bb6250bcedba03bbcbf17125)*

No amount of editing can change how it was originally created; how it was generated sets the initial style and it's very hard to change once it's set.

For more background about analogous reasoning, see ["What Colour are your bits?"](https://ansuz.sooke.bc.ca/entry/23)

This policy makes no distinction between LLM output that comes from a chat interface and output that comes from editor auto-completion.
In most cases the output is "trivial" (see above under ⚠️), but regardless, it is not treated specially by this policy.

### Conditions for modification or dissolution
This policy is not set in stone, and we can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs.

Minor changes, such as typo fixes, only require a normal PR approval.
Major changes, such as adding a new rule or canceling an existing rule, require a successful MCP (2 approvals and no concerns) from each team that ratified the policy.

> 

Reviewer 42: Speaking as a compiler team member, I would be very uncomfortable binding the team with a policy that cannot be changed/removed except with a lack of concerns _from any teams that ratified the policy_.

Even a lack of concerns within the compiler team is difficult to overcome for a decision with any kind of controversy, and this topic is guaranteed to have that. The compiler team is large, and there was some recent discussion about whether MCPs bias us for inaction. For purely technical matters I think they are _okay_, but for policy matters like this they are not a good fit.

If the text bakes in "lack of concerns", it effectively cements a bias for inaction, which I think would be a mistake. It would be better to defer to the teams' lightweight policy making processes to the extent they have them, building in a fallback option for when they do not.

Finally, the part that the text leaves unclear is whether a team is allowed to withdraw without the agreement of the other teams. I think the answer is certainly **yes**, and the text should be explicit about it.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..f716356205795cbca88af27f6bf4cc5908b6006e)*

Reviewer: I don't think that a lack of coordination between the involved teams is really possible with a policy that binds so tightly to a shared repo. Just considering the standard library and the compiler, for example, I don't think it's really possible to have standards for review and merging that drift too far apart considering the fact that changes to one has massive effects on the other, even excluding changes that touch both.

Perhaps rustdoc could potentially be the one team that successfully removes themselves from the repo and starts being managed as a subtree, but in terms of compiler and libs, I don't really see a lack of coordination being possible.

----

Also re: "lack of concerns," while it is not public yet, libs has plans to ensure an explicit override for concerns on ACPs being overridable by an FCP, so that the process degrades into an FCP in case of controversy, but remains relatively frictionless when there's no controversy. I think this is a fair way to handle this.

Reviewer 42: > I don't think that a lack of coordination between the involved teams is really possible with a policy that binds so tightly to a shared repo.

If that's true then we should accept that the council can change the policy, because one of the council's main functions is to allow for cross-team coordination of shared resources.

The point I am making is the same reason the council was given this purpose: This kind of coordination is _difficult_ and functionally becomes impossible, given the size of the project, when any team member can object. If this policy is accepted, it only proves my point: The heroic effort that @jyn514 went to, the length of this thread, the length of the internal threads leading up to it, the lengthy conversations to resolve concerns, the toxic communication... **no one wants to go through that again**.

Requiring a "lack of objections" for changes will effectively cement this policy in its current form for all time. Or at least until it becomes very obviously harmful, which IMO is too late.

> libs has plans to ensure an explicit override for concerns on ACPs being overridable by an FCP

This doesn't address my point about concerns being a veto.

Reviewer: The point here is that concerns are only a *soft* veto: they convert an extremely quick, loose process into a stricter one determined by a smaller subset of people. If someone has a completely uncontroversial change, it will be accepted with effectively no friction, but if something *is* controversial, it falls back to something which requires more consensus. Technically, concerns are still a unilateral veto in the FCP process, but ultimately, there is going to be a point where some subset of people must make a decision, and that's not really avoidable.

I think that the LC is not necessarily the right solution here because it ironically has *too little* representation of the people involved; libs and compiler are only two members of the LC, and by normal FCP rules, this means their votes can technically be overridden by the rest of the LC. While we still have the unilateral veto process for normal FCPs by adding concerns, the point stands that the LC is meant to represent *the entire project*, whereas the `rust-lang/rust` repo is explicitly *not the entire project*, even though it's "the main part" of it.

(I would still disagree with that framing, honestly, but I could understand if people thought of it that way. Many crucial parts of the project are not inside it, or only subtrees of it.)

I think it would be a very fair point to include the moderation team in the discussion, since well, moderation ultimately has to deal with the consequences of it. Although I don't think that giving the same group of people control over everything in the project is a good idea, and we already have gone over this across several discussions. It not only harms the project by centralising decisionmaking on the same handful of people, but it also harms said people by giving them more work than they can reasonably handle.

I think that we should really be refining the FCP, MCP, ACP, etc. processes instead of just using those processes with the LC instead.

Reviewer 5: I would start by taking the claim that “we can evolve it as we gain more experience working with LLMs” – as explicitly called out in the policy – at face value. 

---

I personally do believe there’s a very high chance that a *change* to this document - following the documented procedure - will entail significantly less effort than this initial ratification process. Indeed we shouldn’t need to go through all that again what went into it this time.

---

Especially if one team (or a subset of teams) wanted to add or adjust a rule in ways that should really exclusively affect their “part” of the repository, then it would be weird IMO that a concern from a member of a different team could be seriously upheld as a strong veto against such a change. I think concern means *concern*, not veto.

For example, if t-compiler decided to specifically allow some mechanism for experimentation even for (certain) soundness-critical areas – e.g. MIR building – I don’t see how such a change should really get valid concerns from t-libs, t-rustdoc, or t-bootstrap. (I'm not 100% sure about t-types.)

---

But if - despite all of this - it later *really* turns out to be way too hard to make perhaps small but still significant (i.e. “Major”) changes to the policy through concerns being (ab?)used as strong vetos, and/or communication around it actually becoming any similar in length and vigor to what’s happening for the initial policy, then… maybe that’s *already* coming close to

> objective concern raised about active harm the policy is having on the reputation of Rust

Though I can see a point that – maybe it’s useful to explicitly give the council more options in this document itself besides full **dissolution**.

---

Maybe after

> Major changes, such as adding a new rule or canceling an existing rule, require a successful MCP (2 approvals and no concerns) from each team that ratified the policy.

adding something like

> If evolving this policy with the above mechanism proves unworkable, especially if a team end up significantly hindered in autonomously making decisions concerning its own purview, then these conditions for modification can be adjusted by a leadership council FCP.

could work?

---

Even without such a clause: *Implicitly*, the power of LC is effectively already much larger anyway, isn’t it? As far as I understand, they could - for instance - just decide that LLM policy decisions now get made by a new dedicated team, and the only formal requirements is a “should” clause in the leadership-council RFC of “The Council should favor working with teams on alternative strategies prior to shifting purviews”.[^1]
*(The one thing that in turn “protects” teams from the council is of course the fact that all top level teams have a representative there.)*

[^1]: *[[-> This section of the RFC.](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3392-leadership-council.html#determining-and-changing-team-purviews)]*<br>Even *temporarily* shifting purviews is explicitly allowed.

Reviewer 16: My .2 cents after reading the comments in this thread (hope I can help):

1) I wouldn't escalate to the LC as regulator for changes to this document simply because a) they do not represent teams in a way that *in this specific case* would be effective[^1] (as I think ClarFon hints) and b) they are too busy with other stuff.

2) IMO there's no way around it: significant changes to this doc need to be evaluated by the people impacted by this policy. Stakeholders are called to have a say here. And the voting process should be "explicit" (i.e. *I agree or I do no agree because X and Y*) rather than "implicit" (*no one complains so I guess we're fine? :shrug:*).

    How to do this I don't know: we have many decisional protocols, let's pick one or figure that out when the time comes. While working on this document I think we have learned one of two things that will hopefully make discussions about future changes easier to manage (esp. for the person proposing said changes :sweat_smile: )

[^1]: it would be similar to asking an LC member to summarize in a boolean value :+1: / :-1:  a multitude of opinions from the team they represent

Reviewer 8: I get that it's going to be painful to change this policy, and all the more so once more teams are on board. But I think that's inherent to the reality of having a unified collaborative policy across teams, and having such a policy is important. If one team can unilaterally change the policy over the objections of others, or change it for themselves and ignore the collaborative policy in favor of their own, that defeats a large amount of the purpose of having a more unified collaborative policy across teams.

I hope, in the future, the direction we move in is to get more teams signing off on this policy, as written.

And I have a reasonable amount of hope that, when there are desirable changes to the policy, we will be able to find agreement to make them. It's going to be hard, but not impossible.

Reviewer 26: It's my view, in agreement with what @tmandry raised, that compiler cannot later be blocked from changing its own policies, for the code and processes that compiler owns exclusively, by objections from or lack of consent by members of sibling teams.  I do not believe that it's within the power of a team to surrender (i.e., *alienate*) decision-making over its own policies in this way.

To the degree this policy would seek to prevent a team from later withdrawing from it without the consent of other teams, I'd consider that a council matter, falling under the council's chartered responsibility (under RFC 3392) of "coordinating Project-wide changes to teams, structures, or processes".

My suggestion would be for the policy to make clear that teams can withdraw of their own accord.

Author: > If evolving this policy with the above mechanism proves unworkable, especially if a team end up significantly hindered in autonomously making decisions concerning its own purview, then these conditions for modification can be adjusted by a leadership council FCP.

I quite like this suggestion. I've added it.

Reviewer 26: While that's an improvement, it still uncomfortably seeks to flip the default: a team wanting to withdraw needs to make a showing that evolving the policy has proved unworkable and attain an affirmative council consensus.  I don't think a team can constrain its future self in this way in the first place.  Without a council resolution, I would consider any implication in the policy that a team cannot withdraw to be *void*, regardless of its text.  But such a void implication in the text would be confusing, in terms of governance, so I'd prefer we avoid that.

> …especially if a team end up significantly hindered in autonomously making decisions concerning its own purview…

Separately, this is trivially true.  If the policy seeks to prevent a team from autonomously setting policies concerning matters exclusively within its own purview (and from withdrawing from this policy in order to otherwise set them), then *obviously*, were that not void, the team's *autonomous* decision-making authority concerning its own purview would be significantly hindered.

Reviewer: I still think that the repo is too deeply tied to multiple teams to really have agreements on procedure without co-operation, but perhaps maybe one of the solutions worth exploring (which would be entirely outside this policy, to be clear) might be having a team comprised of compiler, library, and similar team members whose specific focus is on curating the resources for contributors and reviewers. Right now, we *do* have those delegations, but they are still separated across multiple places, e.g.:

* rustc dev guide
* lang-docs
* bootstrap
* triage
* (no dedicated team for libs-docs, but if we separated out std dev guide, for example, that would also go here)

and maybe we should consider having a proper dedicated consensus mechanism here that isn't the LC, since the set of shareholders is technically unique. Plus, I think we should consider having more cross-functional teams that aren't just the LC, since spreading the workload across more people is going to make things a lot easier longer term. While the LC *does* cover completely-cross-project situations like funding and organising, I think that having them deal with "in the weeds" tasks like this one would probably be a poor use of their time. They can still act as a good temporary workaround, but I think we need a better solution, and that solution probably shouldn't be just one team unilaterally deciding to withdraw from cross-functional decisions that still affect other teams.

And also worth mentioning, it's totally fair for members of the LC to overlap with this team (as they already overlap with their own representative teams), just, the *group* role would be different here.

----

And to be clear about the concrete ask here: I think that the *current* workaround of the LC is acceptable, but that we could potentially formulate such a dedicated team/working group in charge of this that would replace their role here. I feel like implicitly, the LC can always step in if they absolutely have to, but we would like to avoid that in most cases just due to the fact that they have bigger things to deal with and don't want to centralise too much on them.

Reviewer 5: @traviscross 

> a team wanting to withdraw needs to make a showing that evolving the policy has proved unworkable and attain an affirmative council consensus

That isn't the intended route at all though. On one hand, a team wanting to withdraw should not *start* with talking to LC; on the other hand, even the documented possibility of involving LC doesn't suggest it should *ends* with the LC consensus, either. The idea is for LC, merely to fix the procedures to *then* make your withdrawal possible in a subsequent step.

<details><summary>In more details… (<b>expand/collapse</b>)</summary>

If a team wants to withdraw they open a PR to change this document under the Major changes procedure. A team wanting to withdraw would anyway **need to define** what that withdrawal *means* for them; this is the way they do it.

Now I expect that such a PR will just go through that way! If the chosen form of "withdrawal"[^1] is affecting *only* things that the team has exclusive purview over, there **shouldn't** really be any relevant concerns upheld by other teams against that intention, and it should also be straightforward to ask for the 2 approvals from each of the other teams for reaching the formal requirements. (You can't do without any formal requirement because withdrawal can come in so many forms that, ultimately, it's an arbitrary major change to this document. So someone of each team will should have time to double-check whether or not the changes *actually affect their purviews*.)

The same idea would apply for local rules deviations. The benefit over a withdrawal in such a case is that you can still document the *new* changed rules in the same document, no need to duplicate everything and have completely separate rulebooks.

So let's assume it doesn't work smoothly: you're on a team has opened a PR change to this policy to change rules that affect *only your own team*, you have consensus in your team, but the PR still somehow gets stuck waiting for approval or having concerns fom anoter team. Ideally you can understand the reason *why* it got stuck. If it's a shortcoming of the decision process that seems solvable, open a second PR with an improvement to the decision process for Major changes, which may help get it unstuck. Ask for the all-team MCP on that second PR. This doesn't go lead anywhere either? Then it's time to talk to leadership-council, there are two PRs that easily help you demonstrate the problem of how evolving this document has become unworkable (and LC can decide to merge the second PR for you)!

</details>

---

> > …especially if a team end up significantly hindered in autonomously making decisions concerning its own purview…
> 
> Separately, this is trivially true.

This is fully in line with my own interpretation, which I had shared further up in this thread:

> Even without such a clause: _Implicitly_, the power of LC is effectively already much larger anyway, isn’t it? […]

I find the clause very useful nonetheless, since it does remind everyone explicitly about the fact that teams have the right to autonomously make decisions concerning their own respective purviews.

This is thus already *more broad* than a clarification only about, specifically, "withdrawals" being possible.[^3]

The other thing that writing this down is supposed to achieve is to make making consensus in LC easier to achieve because LC members no longer have to debate *why* they should become involved if it's documented as an intended/agreed procedure.

---

Did a team give up powers then? I would agree with you, they could not possibly *actually* have given up decision powers over things that are exclusively in their purview.

<details><summary>Concretely… (<b>expand/collapse</b>)</summary>

let's, again, assume the process doesn't work smoothly. You want to withdraw (perhaps partially), and the PR that defines the modalities that team choses keeps being blocked by power outside of their control. What's next? In principle, at that point you *could* already decide to make the withdrawal de-facto effective unilaterally. Teams *inherently* hold the rights to decide on their purview. Feel free to tell people about the change; publish a local policy somewhere that's supposed to supersede this one in certain places you own; act on it in those places as far as actions/behavior from your team are concerned; definitely also reach out to moderators to inform us and get confirmation[^2] to you that we'll also already be moderating based on the new reality, regardless of the state of this document.

Afterwards, of course you should still keep trying to land some update for this document to make things better-documented again.

</details>

[^1]: We do discuss "withdrawal" but for most teams here *full* withdrawal is impossible anyway, unless the team is able to get rid of all overlap in purviews with other teams. As long as there remains some shared areas of the `rust-lang/rust` repo, the team would need at least to *partially* stay involved with this policy.

[^2]: mods might want to double-check that you have at least given the intended way a try at all, and that the new policy is documented *somewhere*, and clear in scope. Mods might also want to raise concerns ourselves if your new policy is expected to generate a lot more efforts for enforcement

[^3]: Adding in a withdrawal clause doesn't actually create any particularly actionable way to update the policy in case such a withdrawal is wanted. Or it might fail to protect another team from a shared space also being pulled out of this policy’s scope.

Author: > Even a lack of concerns within the compiler team is difficult to overcome for a decision with any kind of controversy, and this topic is guaranteed to have that. [...] If the text bakes in "lack of concerns", it effectively cements a bias for inaction, which I think would be a mistake.

@tmandry @joshtriplett how would you feel about raising the bar for blocking a change to the policy? right now the bar is "anyone on any ratifying team can raise a concern". what if we changed it to require concerns to be *seconded*, to have a second person agree "yes, this is worth blocking the change over"? that still avoids majority rule, which i agree is a bad fit structurally, but without completely freezing the policy in place.

in addition, we could apply looser rules to *just* the experiment and circuit breaker rules: changing the allowed/disclosure/banned categories still has strict requirements, but changes to the experiment have lower requirements. the goal here is that i want the experiment to be able to *react to changing circumstances*, which by-definition requires that we be able to act quickly.

for example, we could say that if a concern filed against *changes to the experiment* (or circuit breaker) has been unresolved for N weeks, it can be overruled by turning the process from an MCP (at least two "yes" votes) into an FCP (at most two abstentions). that lets us keep a bias towards action without making it so that proposed changes just need to wait out a clock.

Reviewer 8: We're trying to achieve a policy that has widespread support and consensus. We shouldn't be trying to invent an even more novel decision-making mechanism than this already has.

This policy *already* has multiple mechanisms to allow changes to take place more easily. First, it only requires team MCPs, not FCPs. Second, it now has a mechanism to break deadlocks: it grants the LC (in its cross-team coordination capacity) the ability to change the process, at which point changes can occur via the new process. That is, very directly, an override mechanism for biasing towards action/change, since that mechanism covers "evolving this policy with the above mechanism proves unworkable". I think those are already a substantial compromise towards supporting further evolution.

The policy absolutely needs to react to changing circumstances; that's one reason why (for instance) it sets out an experiment to continuously evaluate those circumstances.

As a project, we very rapidly seemed to find consensus on the position "it's okay, and in fact important, to use LLMs to do security analysis". Six months ago, that wasn't particularly on people's radar and it didn't stand out as a major point in LLM discussions. Today, that position seems to have widespread support, and I expect that position would have no trouble passing as a policy change if we'd previously had a policy in place that didn't support it.

Similarly, I think we're going to successfully make other reasonable changes to policy that have widespread support, and I expect that we will find paths forward as circumstances change. I think it's exceedingly unlikely that we'll end up deadlocked on matters people *actually agree about*. And where we disagree, we'll find reasonable solutions. We're not going to end up "freezing in place".

Author: I agree with Tyler that we should have a bias towards action here, and with TC that we have to deal with the facts of how hard it will be to change the policy, not our ideals of how easy we wish it should be. To that effect, I've added a new condition for modification or dissolution:

If the [proposed LLM committee](https://github.com/rust-lang/leadership-council/issues/308) is created, it would have governing authority over this policy.

That avoids needing unanimous consent from ~30 different people while still while still ensuring people are represented. One concern I've heard is that team leads and council members have a very broad mandate and wouldn't have proper time to dedicate to the policy; I think having a dedicated committee avoids that.

The goal of the channel is *not* to act as an additional gatekeeper on LLM-created PRs.
Instead, it's to collect information about *whether this experiment is working*:
Are people doing interesting and useful things with LLMs? Are they learning? Are they making repeat contributions?

Because the new channel is private, it will have higher-than-normal standards for what counts as on-topic.
For example, the following are on-topic:
- Whether a PR meets the criteria for the experiment exception
- Whether a PR follows the policy in general

And the following are off-topic:
- Technical and design discussions. These should be posted directly on the PR or in a public Zulip channel.
- Discussions about effort, communication style, or intent
- General discussions about the LLM policy

### Circuit breaker

To avoid the risk of LLMs "overwhelming" the codebase, or becoming de-facto required, we set a limit on how many LLM-created PRs can be merged.
If more than half of PRs merged in a 6-week window are LLM-created, we disallow merging new LLM-created PRs until we go back below 50%, with a minimum cooldown of 10 days.

> This window is chosen to align with our existing release cycle, and the cooldown is to avoid flip-flopping between allowed and disallowed.

Reviewer 42: A minimum cooldown makes the flip-flopping problem worse. You would get a large backlog of PRs that flood in at the end of the cooldown period, immediately triggering the circuit breaker again. It's the thundering herd problem.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..1b49326aa136c1b29946ed5aafc4b6963e190253)*

Reviewer 31: As I understand it, the intent here is for it to be an experiment, not to have LLM contributions go through the same procedure as normal ones.

It is about accepting a very limited amount of LLM contributions, as an experiment to see what the project would like to do in the future.

At the point where we would get to half of the merged PRs being LLM-generated, this would definitely not be an experiment anymore. This thundering herd problem would be by design, as the whole point is for there not to be many of them.

Hoping I'm not putting words in anyone's mouth, feel free to call me out if my interpretation is not correct.

Reviewer 8: > A minimum cooldown makes the flip-flopping problem worse. You would get a large backlog of PRs that flood in at the end of the cooldown period, immediately triggering the circuit breaker again. It's the thundering herd problem.

Without having hysteresis prevention, we can flip-flop on and off with every couple of PRs, or every bors merge; that would be substantially more chaotic. A longer period is more predictable, and gives us time to have interesting conversations and design parameters for how we want to handle LLM contributions going forward.

A longer period will also give time for *other* contributions to make their way in, and give time to experience whether things feel qualitatively different during the pause.

This isn't meant to be a "rate limit" that just gratuitously slows down LLM contributions, and a circuit breaker *without* hysteresis would act more like a rate limit. It's meant to be a *guardrail* on the experiment: an indicator of whether it is still, in fact, an experiment that we are evaluating, rather than business-as-usual. And it's meant to preserve the other important property: it is important that we continue to support non-LLM contributions.

#### ✅ Allowed
The following are allowed.
- Any use of an LLM where you are the only one who sees the output. For example:
  - Asking an LLM questions about an existing codebase.
  - Asking an LLM to summarize comments on an issue, PR, or RFC.
      - ℹ️ This does not allow reposting the summary publicly. This only includes your own personal use.
  - Asking an LLM to privately review your code or writing.
      - ℹ️ This does not apply to public comments. See "review bots" under ⚠️ below.
  - Writing dev-tools for your own personal use using an LLM.
  - Using an LLM to generate possible solutions to an issue, learning from them, and then writing something from scratch in your own style.
- Syncing code and documentation into `rust-lang/rust` (e.g., using submodules, subtrees, [josh](https://github.com/josh-project/josh), etc.) from other repositories that do not follow this policy.
- Using an LLM in the creation of experimental code changes that are not meant to be reviewed and will never be merged but must live as draft PRs on `rust-lang/rust` for tooling reasons, such as to run crater or perf.

#### ❌ Banned
The following are banned.

> - Comments from a personal user account that are originally authored by an LLM.

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
- Comments from a personal user account that are originally generated by an LLM.
```

As per my previous [comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3950#discussion_r3103640086), authorship is something that does not apply to a LLM.

---

The wording should be amended, or _all_ instances of "originally authored" should be placed in quotation marks to indicate the term is being used in a non-literal sense.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/2c01db32cfa8ffbe87e269f9c21f288ca94bbeaa..6374d5747e5b4be83b79af0eb6c696673b379aa0)*

Author: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#discussion_r3248755681

         LLMs are conditionally allowed to assist with the *logic* surrounding a diagnostic (see "Experiment: LLM-created code changes" below),
         but they must not be used to create the message itself.
    - ℹ️ This does not include "trivial" changes (see ⚠️ below).
- Policies or processes that are written such that an LLM is required to execute them.
    - For example, you must not *only* document how to take meeting notes with an `AGENTS.md`.

>       Documentation must be authored for humans primarily, and LLM documentation may only summarize it, not add new detail.

Reviewer 8: This seems to have gotten caught in the meeting-related revert. The "For example" is the part that should be reverted, not the other two lines. (There are plenty of policies and processes specifically about rust-lang/rust, to which this would apply. For example, you must not *only* document how to add a new XYZ test by explaining how to prompt an LLM to do so.)

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..ab6f5c68e2f5a1e72fcd45f6b02c5ebf9f9a854b)*

To avoid the risk of LLMs "overwhelming" the codebase, or becoming de-facto required, we set a limit on how many LLM-created PRs can be merged.
If more than half of PRs merged in a 6-week window are LLM-created, we disallow merging new LLM-created PRs until we go back below 50%, with a minimum cooldown of 10 days.

> This window is chosen to align with our existing release cycle, and the cooldown is to avoid flip-flopping between allowed and disallowed.

Reviewer 26: (This continues the top-level thread at https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#issuecomment-4771123817 through https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#issuecomment-4808786003.)

> I know people don't believe me but I really do mean it when I say that I want us to be able to change the policy.

I believe you.

Meaning that you *want* us to be able to change the policy is different, though, than the forward-looking factual question of how hard it will prove.

> The policy says you may have to wait up to 10 days.

If the *natural* rate of some group of PRs (that we have the review capacity for and would otherwise accept) is 60% and we impose a 50% rate limit, then (absent backpressure) that will produce an unbounded backlog and unbounded latency, not 10 day latency.

> It is madness that we are being told that we must be exceedingly and indefinitely hospitable to things for which the engineering consequences of their use at scale have largely not yet been discovered, in order to perpetually appease the companies trying to sell people on unchecked usage of such tools.

Nobody is suggesting that we *must* be hospitable or appeasing.  The choices we make simply *affect* the help we can expect to receive.

We should act with knowledge of the consequences of our actions.  @tmandry, who has spent of himself for years to attract help for us, is offering valuable insight into that when it would be easier for him to stay silent and keep out of this unpleasant discussion.

I'd suggest we'd do well to be *appreciative* and *curious*.

*[View changes since the review](https://triagebot.infra.rust-lang.org/gh-changes-since/rust-lang/rust-forge/1040/fc00080fb4d241a24df853827bb1a59aae312ed8..a4d63ade7265400c04773497df42d7cf319beef2)*

Reviewer 38: As someone in a similar role as @tmandry, working to attract support to the Rust Project as lead of the Safety-Critical Rust Consoritum and guiding Rust adoption at Toyota Group, I feel the concern @tmandry raised sharply.

Even within safety critical spaces, where there's potential for loss of human life, we're working on how AI tooling can be incorporated in our processes while ensuring quality, verification, and compliance.  If, after doing that substantial work, we couldn't use our own validated processes for working on Rust (without incurring arbitrary and unmanagable delays), that would impair my ability to attract support for the Project.

Reviewer 32: Why are conflicts with the policies of large corporations and contributor alienation that may cause considered an on-topic motivation for policy here, when contributor alienation caused by the usage of LLM-generated code at all due to things in the Official List of Off-Topic Topics in the OP is not?

Reviewer 31: I don't think @tmandry is wrong, and I do think it is valuable to let us know about this, but I just don't think we should be sacrificing our values as a project to appease corporate interests. Having boundaries is good, and there are some we should not cross, no matter what potential gains we could get.

Reviewer: My longer comment was deleted after a mutual agreement that it was unhelpful. And so, I'm going to include my shorter bit to at least address something important:

> Companies that require employees to use provided AI tooling do so because they believe it makes work more efficient. Since they're paying those people for work, that's a legitimate thing to do. Characterizing this as *abusive* is unhelpful.

Forcing people to do something that does not *necessarily* make them productive, that sometimes makes them *less productive*, that sometimes makes them *less happy*, even in circumstances where other projects have explicitly drawn boundaries around its usage, is abusive. Full stop, not debatable. I have experienced enough abuse in my days to know what it looks like, and this is it. This is not sensationalising; this is correctly using a term to describe something that's happening.

Also, keeping this analogy in because I find it apt: imagine if companies instituted mandatory pomadoro timers and apps upon all employees, because one employee thought they were helpful for productivity. For some people, it would be incredible to have productivity tools supported by their company like this. For other people, it would be literal hell on earth and absolutely make them miserable and worse at their job. We can call this what it is: abuse. There are enough people who've talked about how LLM mandates at their jobs demonstrably made their working life miserable that I don't think it's debatable that calling this abuse is correct.

Again, if *individual employees* are aided by LLM usage, if it makes them more productive, if it makes them happier, *that* is a valid argument that I feel should be on the table for allowing its use. That people are *forced* to use it, is not a valid argument. This is going to be my final message here.

Reviewer 27: [Earlier in the discussion](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040#issuecomment-4294130363) the subject of observers making lists of software projects and putting them on a web page was swiftly dismissed as an inappropriate basis to make decisions about policy. I find it puzzling that the whims of bosses in some companies is being treated more seriously than that as a factor to consider for policy decisions.

Reviewer 31: As someone involved with the Starlight Network No-AI list, I would *love* to put Rust on there and give my favorite programming language more publicity.

Reviewer 42: I think this discussion has lost sight of the argument I am making. What I am saying is: **Make guard rails firm but predictable.**

The circuit breaker creates unpredictability in the contributor pipeline, based on the assumption that halting the queue will force a better outcome through a high-friction governance structure. It treats systemic failure as a social engineering tool. To an outside observer, that will come off as high risk and wishful thinking.

Structurally engineering a crisis to force consensus in the future erodes trust and discourages contribution today.

Reviewer 4: Is the discussion of the blatant display of corporate capture in this thread also off-topic here?

Reviewer 27: A circuit breaker trips in exceptional circumstances to protect a system from being overloaded. Presuming that putting in a circuit breaker means its limit will be pushed repeatedly seems... unfounded.

Reviewer 43: If you short an electrical outlet, a breaker **does** trip repeatedly and indefinitely, until the breaker is changed to support a higher load, or the current changes.

As this policy (and the experiment) is written, there is not a way to change the breaker nor the current without going through this whole process again and revising the policy with consensus.

> Structurally engineering a crisis to force consensus in the future erodes trust and discourages contribution today.

I agree with this point; even if it's not the intent of the circuit breaker, it is the effect.

However, without the circuit breaker, it seems that the experiment would act as a de-facto rule, allowing for unlimitted LLM contributions (to any part of the code base from `rust-lang` members) with consenting reviewers. This is also undesirable IMO.

I get the intention of the circuit breaker (to prevent LLM contributions taking over the project and making non-llm contributors second-class), but I don't believe it is the right solution.

Reviewer 43: I felt just saying "the circuit breaker is the wrong answer" without giving an alternative wasn't very helpful. So, a suggestion, perhaps the experiment should be limited to a specific section of the rust project, rather than limitted by contribution quantity?

This ensures the experiment doesn't take over the project at large, nor does it become a de-facto rule. It also allows for introspection and comparison to the non-experimental areas of the project (they act as a control group).

This kind of experiment could better inform future policy revision discussions by providing a solid technical basis on which to make future decissions.

------

I want to mention that I'm staunchly anti-LLM for many reasons of ethics, and wish there was concensus to bar it's use at the Code of Conduct level. But, that concensus is not present, therefore this policy is one based on technical merits. I belive this experimental model gives an opportunity for the technology to prove or disprove it's merits and the extent of it's utility.

My personal belief is the non-experimental part of the policy is already an accurate reflection of the technology's meritted technical uses (i.e, reductive ways from big data [code] to small data [analysis], as opposed to generation from small data [prompts] to big data [code]). It is my belief that the experiment would serve to prove that point.

Reviewer 5: > As this policy (and the experiment) is written, there is not a way to change the breaker nor the current without going through this whole process again and revising the policy with consensus.

"This process" is currently the creation of a completely new policy document with FCP.

Changinging it is the creation of a specific (and well-motivated) change, is inherently smaller in scope, and additionally and [goes through MCP](https://github.com/jyn514/rust-forge/blob/a4d63ade7265400c04773497df42d7cf319beef2/src/policies/llm-usage.md?plain=1#L306) not FCP. It is *supposed* to be an easier process, and if it ends up not working regardless, then it [can also be changed](https://github.com/jyn514/rust-forge/blob/a4d63ade7265400c04773497df42d7cf319beef2/src/policies/llm-usage.md?plain=1#L314) by Leadership Council.

Claiming anything else would also put into question the (IMHO very valuable to ever get things done) appeals such as

> As you are reading, we ask you to consider […]
> * Does your concern need to be addressed before merging or can it be addressed in a follow-up?
>     * Keep in mind the cost of *not* creating a policy.

because for that to make sense we need to ensure that there *will* be follow-ups.

---

Anyway, I'm not arguing in favor or against the circuit-breaker rule with this. Though - if anything - the existence of a circuit breaker rule probably gives the text more of a pessimistic spin[^1] towards the outlook on being able to change things *once we actually **know** more*.[^2]

[^1]: which I hope won’t be *self-perpetuating*

[^2]: and I don’t *really* love that implication as it can reduce trust

Reviewer 43: > ... additionally and goes through MCP not FCP...

Ah, thank you for that explanation. I'm completely outside all of these processes, so I wasn't aware of that.

Reviewer 44: I was really hoping to be able to stay out of this thread. Oh well, here we go...

While I am very sympathetic to the goals of the circuit breaker, and very skeptical about large-scale LLM use even just on technical grounds (let alone ethical ones), and I find it appalling when company execs force employees to use tools that can cause harm without regard for technical judgment, I don't think a hard threshold for LLM-generated PRs is sufficiently effective or necessary.

First of all, I think the analogy is just not particularly apt: Electrical circuit breakers are simple because we have a very good idea of how much current at a given voltage can be safely sent through a wire. We have no idea (and no consensus!) how many LLM-generated PRs is "too many". Electrical circuit breakers are necessary because in case of a short, someone or something needs to react *fast*, or else the building is literally on fire. The quality of the code in the compiler is not going to deteriorate on the scale of hours or days, so we have plenty of time to let our normal social processes work their way -- and we have the magic of undo (aka `git revert`) in case a PR causes acute issues.

In terms of *effectiveness*: "fraction of PRs merged" is an odd metric. We have very different kinds of PRs in the repo, from small doc fixes to large-scale refactorings to major new features, and we have PRs touching various different parts of the compiler. Throwing them all in one bin doesn't result in a very meaningful measurement IMO. If 100% of the large-scale new features are LLM-generated, I am fairly sure that would still come out to way less than 50% of the PRs. It also creates odd incentives, like quickly getting a bunch of small non-LLM PRs merged to drag down the average.  It may be worth watching the "fraction of LLM-generated PRs metric", but the moment we make that metric a basis for automatic decisions, it ceases being a good metric.

In terms of *necessity*: what I personally would do if I get the impression that the codebase is turning to the worse due to too much LLM-generated code, is to start a discussion with my t-compiler colleagues (in particular the ones that were involved in these PRs, which as per this policy always need to be involved from the planning stage). I trust that we can have a useful technical discussion about whatever problems have come up with LLM-generated PRs. I trust that if a notable fraction of the compiler team echos a shared concern, the rest of the team won't just disregard that and keep landing the same kinds of changes at the same pace. (And it's not like the circuit breaker alleviates the need for trust, see the points about gaming the metric above.)

tl;dr: I can't really think of any problem that this circuit breaker would actually solve, even if it ever triggered, which I also doubt will happen under this policy.

Reviewer 8: > We have no idea (and no consensus!) how many LLM-generated PRs is "too many".

The exact quantitative level isn't what makes it a circuit breaker; if anything, "50%" is just one of those numbers that feels fair, but there's nothing intrinsically perfect about it.

The more important detail is "it's something more than 0 and less than 100". If we agree that it's important to continue being welcoming to people who *don't* want to use LLMs, and if we agree that an experiment should actually be an *experiment* that's trying to evaluate this, then *somewhere* between 0% and 100% is a threshold for "this isn't an experiment anymore, it's just the thing we're doing".

The circuit breaker makes the experiment actually an *experiment*, which has *some* bound on it where we say "okay, this isn't an experiment anymore, so what should we do now?". And, importantly, it avoids pre-determining either of the two most obvious answers to "what should we do now?" that would be maximally satisfying to one group and maximally unsatisfying to another, instead picking something that leads people to *want* to discuss and find the right path forward.

There may be other ways to accomplish that. It's not obvious what would accomplish the two goals of making sure the experiment is an experiment *and* making sure the parameters don't *default* into becoming either a perma-experiment or a perma-ban.

Reviewer 9: Why is such an approach better than simply setting a "the experiment has a fixed duration" mechanism? Fixed duration + replacement policy approach that *forces* decision makers to come to a policy in a timely fashion (e.g. leadership council does approval voting with the policy with the most votes being adopted) feels like the right move if you want the idea that this is an experiment to have teeth.

Reviewer 31: Personally, I feel like even a 50% threshold is very high. If *half* of the contributions are coming from LLMs, then this is already definitely not an experiment, just a backdoor to using LLMs. The point of these restrictions is to prevent it from becoming a backdoor.

> Why is such an approach better than simply setting a "the experiment has a fixed duration" mechanism?

Only having a fixed time but no limit on LLM contributions makes this a time-bounded backdoor to the policy.

Reviewer 25: I agree. The basic gist of the policy is "LLM use ok for review/analysis, not for creation". Which allows quite a lot of LLM use! Plus there is some scope for experimentation with LLM creation. But LLM creation is clearly intended to be a minority activity, under strict conditions, for a certain amount of time. If we are anywhere near 50% then things are getting badly out of control. This is why I don't care about the exact criteria (no such criteria would be perfect) and I think this talk of hysteresis and thundering herds and the exact definition of "circuit breaker" is overthinking things.

Also, having a strict, numeric threshold criteria is good, because "we should just talk it over if necessary" is fraught -- just look at the several bajillion comments on this issue!

Reviewer 8: > Why is such an approach better than simply setting a "the experiment has a fixed duration" mechanism?

I'd be all for a fixed duration, but the problem is precisely that a fixed duration requires some explicit thing that happens at the end of that duration, and the most obvious default things that could happen are either "experiment continues indefinitely" or "experiment terminates", and neither one of those is going to fly.

> Fixed duration + replacement policy approach that forces decision makers to come to a policy in a timely fashion (e.g. leadership council does approval voting with the policy with the most votes being adopted)

We don't do things by vote, and votes do *very badly* at handling polarizing topics. (Votes don't push us to find consensus solutions, just ones that can pass a vote.) That's not a mechanism that gets us a policy with widespread project support. That's a mechanism that would give us a policy alienating substantial portions of the project.

Reviewer 9: > but the problem is precisely that a fixed duration requires some explicit thing that happens at the end of that duration

Your circuit breaker approach has the same problem, fundamentally. You need a trigger and a consequence. There's nothing that fundamentally ties the two together.

> We don't do things by vote, and votes do very badly at handling polarizing topics. (Votes don't push us to find consensus solutions, just ones that can pass a vote.)

Consensus-based decision making does much *worse* at handling polarizing topics. The theory here is pretty clear, and we can see the failure mode in action here: inaction due to minority veto that blocks compromise and endless delays. Consensus works well when you can reach a set of shared facts and values, which is clearly not the case on this topic. If the Rust Project continues to insist on it here what will happen is that people will leave the room and leadership positions until there *is* uniform consensus; not through respectful fact-finding but through attrition. This isn't some language feature, where dying to the heckler's veto is regrettable but survivable. Please forgive me for speaking bluntly, but this is a slow-rolling crisis within Rust that will not be resolved without action, and leadership (collectively) is resolutely refusing to *act*.

How many months have been spent on trying to find a policy here? How many hours have been burned? How many contributors have burnt out and left or stepped back due to exhausting debate and deadlock?

Blocking the policy to insist on guidelines that you personally find acceptable and others do not is not a neutral option, and the current status quo is that LLM contributions are widely allowed with no restrictions or requirements other than an informal "no slop" consensus, with added costs due to the uncertainty and illegibility of the current stance on AI usage in Rust has on contributors across the spectrum of stances.

I understand why you want to insist on the circuit-breaker policy. I am only a stakeholder here, but I do not think you will find consensus for it, and digging your heels in here is far more likely to result in e.g. @jyn514 simply closing this policy and walking away from the problem than convincing people who are on the opposite side of the argument here to agree with it.

Reviewer 8: @alice-i-cecile I'm trying to solve a specific problem. I'm not attached to the specific solution and am not insisting on that solution; it's not a *great* solution, it's just the best one that @jackh726 and I managed to come to when talking about the problem at length. I'm insisting on *a* viable solution to the problem. If someone has a better solution, I am *enthusiastically in favor* of doing something better instead.

The issue is that the policy as written prior to that addition, without *something* to bound the experiment, is "LLM code contributions are allowed, forever, under the following terms". That's not a compromise; that's just a policy saying "we support LLM-written code" and labeling it an "experiment", written as an exception to other parts of the policy, without any experimental method or bounds on the duration or scale of the experiment. Under that policy and "experiment", we could continue until most contributions use LLMs and non-users of LLMs feel unwelcome, and nothing has to change in the policy.

When @jackh726 and I talked about that problem, the conclusion we came to was that the obvious two approaches to set bounds (whether based on time, PRs, or some other scale) on the experiment would very reasonably hit a impasse:
- @jackh726 (and others he has spoken with) would have a concern with any policy in which the experiment *ends* after some bound if we can't come to an agreement otherwise.
- I (and others I have spoken with) would have a concern with any policy in which the experiment *continues indefinitely* after some bound if we can't come to an agreement otherwise.

In both cases, the concern is that there's no fundamental need for everyone to come to the table to forge an agreement on the next steps after the experiment, because one or another group of folks would get a more-or-less acceptable outcome to them by "pocket veto". We didn't think it was reasonable to encourage that, because we're only likely to get reasonable solutions if everyone has a reason to come to the table to evaluate the experiment and work them out.

If someone has a better solution to that problem, I'd genuinely *love* to see it.

Reviewer 25: This sounds reasonable to me, and I'm willing to trust Jack and Josh's viewpoints.

Reviewer 43: @joshtriplett just throwing ideas out, not sure if something like this has/is being discussed elsewhere, so appologies if I'm reinventing a discarded idea.

1. Set a recuring time interval for experiment review [^1]
2. Leadership Council delegates review to a trusted subset of individuals [^2][^3]
3. That group's responsibilties are:
   - Review the experiment progress and outcomes
   - Make changes to the experiment, including but not limited to
     - Tightening or relaxing experiment requirements [^4]
     - Procedural changes to facilitate better experimentation (data gathering, methods, etc)
   - Propose termination of the experiment, with discussion of conculsions reached, and the results reflected in non-experimental policy.
4. This group has full control to make these changes to the experiment, with the important exception that termination of the experiment (including termination in-effect) requires MCP [^5]

The overall idea here is that this group acts as human circuit breakers. I trust people (especially people not entrenched in either camp) to be able to recognize and remediate issues better than any automated metric we could come up with.

Of course, none of this precludes anyone *else* from proposing changes, including termination of the experiment, following the "PR for minor change, MCP for major" part of this policy.

Also, thinking some more, the policy should specify that the ultimate goal of the group is to terminate the experiment once enough information, both quantitative and qualitative, has been gathered to solidify the LLM policy, **and** once that policy work has occurred.

[^1]: Maybe 18 weeks? That's 3*6 week intervals. The point is that whatever length is chosen needs to be frequent enough to keep the experminet moving, and infrequent enough to keep it out-of-the way of day-to-day operation.

[^2]: This avoids the issue of either extreme getting an automatic veto to terminate/indefinitely continue the experiment, as this group 

[^3]: The group could possibly be the LLM Committee proposed in https://github.com/rust-lang/leadership-council/issues/308

[^4]: But not fully in either direction; the intent is they have the power to prevent harm if LLM use gets out of hand, and also open novel avenues for experimentation

[^5]: Requiring MCP to terminate the expermient *could* be interpreted as the experiment being de-facto policy and never ending. But, I trust those with power to raise concerns ("veto") termination to use it responsibly, and that the experiment should only be sunset once it has informed any necessary policy changes, either here or elsewhere, and MCP can be reached that it can be sunset.

Reviewer 31: Another avenue for reducing the scope of the experiment could be to disallow anything done using "agent mode" (as in, telling an agent to do things via a prompt, like in Claude Code, Codex, etc). This would then allow things like LLM autocomplete, but not much more.

While I am completely against all GenAI/LLM for any purpose, there are things that are more (or less) objectionable, to me. And some people in the same camp may be okay compromising a little in this dimension and allowing experimentation with LLM autocomplete.

Reviewer 24: IMO, restricting usage to autocomplete is a strange and arbitrary line to draw in the sand. I also find autocomplete to be rather useless for any large codebase except for trivial things that would already be allowed by the main policy.

Also, I would rather have a clear boundary like this PR proposes, where in general only trivial LLM-based changes are allowed, where we judge the result as trivial rather than the process to get there. And then within the experiment part, we have the freedom to, well, experiment as much as we want with _how_ the LLM is used, as long as it stays within the area carved out for experimentation (reviewer on board, non-critical part of codebase, etc.).

Author: I've thought about this for a long time, and chatted with Tyler, Boxy, Josh, and various other people.

I understand that this clause is not popular.
I agree with Tyler and Pete that there's potential for this to affect the ability for us to get funding and maintainer time from members of the Foundation, and with Ralf that this is probably not the most technically effective way for the clause to achieve its own goals.

However, I want to caution very strongly against trying to achieve perfection here. The goal of this policy is *not* to last forever; it's to get a policy that we can agree on, without being locked in limbo forever. I think in practice the chances of this clause ever being triggered are very low, and if it is, that's a sign that we have *failed to update the policy in response to changing circumstances*, not a sign that the policy itself has issues. In that case, I think it is in fact a good thing that we're forced to come back to the table and discuss further.

See [the thread above](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-forge/pull/1040/changes#r3613624346) for my comment on how I think we can update the policy in response to changing circumstances.
See the edited PR description for my attempt to write up the tradeoffs of removing this clause.
